captured, cleaned, and incorporated into a single training run. Any model will always
be incomplete and slightly outdated the moment training ends.
This is why retrieval-augmented generation emerged. Instead of expecting a static
model to “know” everything, RAG enables it to dynamically pull in the relevant facts
it otherwise lacks. In our AI engineer’s chatbot, adding RAG allows the model to
fetch the exact wiki page, policy document, or support ticket history at the moment
the user asks a question. The LLM then uses its generative capabilities to synthesize
a final answer grounded in those retrieved materials. The result is a system that is
more accurate, more reliable, and far less prone to hallucination—because it is finally
equipped with the information it needs.
This book focuses on that transformation: moving from LLMs that rely solely on
their pre-training to systems that can reason over private, domain-specific, and
constantly updated data through retrieval. RAG is not just a technical enhancement;
it is the key to making generative AI genuinely useful in real applications.
How Does RAG Work?
As shown in Figure 1-1, a RAG query includes two steps: R (retrieval) and G
(generation). When a user issues a query to a RAG system, the “R” step kicks in
first to retrieve information that is most relevant to the query. The “G” step follows
this, where a response is generated by tasking a large language model to analyze
the retrieved information and the query, and craft a proper response to the query
grounded in the facts retrieved.
Figure 1-1. Basic RAG architecture
Here’s a simple example. Suppose we are building a RAG chatbot to answer medical
questions. The chatbot is grounded in a private data source containing medical books
and journal papers.
Now, consider the following query: “What are the effective treatments for diabetes?”
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Here is how the RAG query flow works in this case:
1. The R (retrieval) step: The system searches the private data and retrieves relevant
1.
documents. In this case, it would find passages specifically about the treatment of
diabetes.
2. The G (generation) step: The LLM then receives the original query and the
2.
retrieved facts. It uses only this retrieved information to synthesize an answer.
The word “augmented” in “retrieval-augmented generation” suggests that the
retrieved information is added to the prompt of an LLM for generation, and in that
sense, augments its internal knowledge with additional facts.
Here is a very basic prompt structure for RAG:
"""
You are an assistant for question-answering tasks. Use the following pieces of 
retrieved context to answer the question. If you don't know the answer, just say
that you don't know.
<question>
{question} 
</question>
<context>
{context}
</context>
Answer:
"""
Here, the variable question is replaced by the actual question string, and context
is a list of facts (each a string). Thus, we task the LLM with a question-answering
task: looking at the retrieved facts (context) and responding to the query using
information and facts provided in the context.
In many ways, the difference between pure LLM use and RAG is similar to the
difference between a closed-book test and an open-book test.
In a closed-book test, students must rely solely on their memory and understanding.
No textbooks, notes, or other reference materials are allowed. Similarly, pure LLM
usage means that all the information you get is based solely on the dataset included
during the LLM training. Such knowledge is stored in the parameters (also known
as weights) of an LLM, which is an artificial neural network whose behavior is deter‐
mined by the values of its weights, and thus referred to as the parametric knowledge.
In contrast, in an open-book test, students can consult textbooks, notes, or other
approved materials during the exam. This setup allows them to refer back to detailed
information if needed, and is exactly how RAG works—the retrieval step provides
additional information to the LLM in real time.
How Does RAG Work? 
| 
3
With that knowledge in place, let’s now go a level deeper to understand what compo‐
nents are required for RAG and how the ingestion and query flows work.
The Blueprint of a RAG Stack
Let’s look at how RAG works in more detail, and specifically, the various components
in the RAG stack. Figure 1-2 depicts two main flows of RAG: the ingestion flow and
the query flow.
Figure 1-2. The RAG stack
The ingestion flow performs the functions needed to extract the data from its source
(like a database, a set of PDF files on S3, text on Notion, etc.) and index it into the
RAG stack.
The query flow performs the full processing of a user query—it retrieves the right
facts and uses the LLM for generation, resulting in the response for the end user. Let’s
look at these in more detail.
The Ingestion Flow
During data ingestion, the RAG system first converts the input data (against which
user queries will be answered) into multiple formats that can be efficient and effective
for query matching, including but not limited to vector embeddings, which represent
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
the semantic meaning of the text. The vector embeddings are then stored in a special
database called a vector database (or vector DB). Alongside each vector, the actual text
is also stored as it is needed for query-time processing. The step of converting data
into vectors is often referred to as indexing or embedding.
Production ingestion pipelines can be quite complex—we will cover some of the
challenges involved, such as document pre-processing, chunking, embedding, data
validation, processing of multimodal inputs, and incremental updates in Chapters 2,
3, and 8.
In the RAG world, the words index, dataset, or corpus are some‐
what used interchangeably to refer to the data that is ingested into
RAG. If we want to be more precise, a dataset (or document set)
is simply the initial raw collection of source files you start with, a
corpus is the curated, cleaned, and organized body of content, and
an index is a high-performance data structure built from the corpus
that is optimized for fast search and retrieval.
The Query Flow
The query flow performs two operations: retrieval and generation.
Retrieval starts with converting the user query into an embedding vector, and then a
vector DB performs a similarity search operation between the query embedding and
all possible matching text (the facts) in the vector DB.
Looking up information using embeddings is called semantic search. By applying
similarity search in the embedding vector space (that humans are unable to compre‐
hend), we can semantically match the intent in queries with relevant text documents.
As we will see later in this book, and especially in Chapters 2 and 3, semantic search
is a basic form of retrieval, and is often not sufficient for high-quality RAG responses
in production deployments. Another basic form of retrieval is lexical search, which
matches texts based on their similarity in the written form. It’s common to use
advanced techniques like hybrid search (combining semantic search with lexical
search) or reranking. Ideally, retrieved pieces of text contain facts that are highly
relevant for answering the user query.
Once we have the relevant facts, the generation step continues: the RAG query flow
then crafts a dedicated prompt template, like what we have seen in “How Does RAG
Work?” on page 2, to instruct the LLM how to produce a response that answers the
user’s query using information in the retrieved results.
Importantly, good RAG pipelines often instruct the LLM to produce references or
citations, so that the response includes not only the raw text of the answer, but also
points to the source of the knowledge that the response is grounded upon.
The Blueprint of a RAG Stack 
| 
5
Although we’ve arrived at the point where a response, possibly with citations, is ready
to be crafted, we’re not done yet!
After the LLM sends back its response, a typical RAG query flow applies guardrails
to ensure the response meets the expected bar of quality. First and foremost is halluci‐
nation detection—namely, validating that the LLM indeed used the facts provided to
it to create a response that is consistent with the facts. In other words, we’re trying
to check that the LLM didn’t make things up. Additional types of guardrails include
detection of bias, toxic or harmful responses, or otherwise disallowed content, as we’ll
see later on in Chapter 3.
So that’s how the RAG ingest and query flows work at a high level.
In practice, when you move beyond a first proof of concept and to a production
deployment of a mission-critical RAG application, things get more complex, and you
need to think through how to address additional challenges:
• How do you optimize the quality of responses by using not just vector search but
•
also hybrid search, reranking, or other more advanced retrieval techniques?
• How do you incorporate information from tables, images, flowcharts, and other
•
multimodal data into a RAG pipeline while maintaining high accuracy?
• How do you measure the quality of your RAG pipeline—retrieval, generation,
•
hallucination, and citations—not only on first deployment, but also continuously,
as you upgrade and improve the RAG pipeline over time?
• How can you extend your RAG to use knowledge graphs or integrate it into
•
agentic workflows (discussed in the sections “Agentic RAG” on page 20 and
“RAG with Knowledge Graphs” on page 21, as well as Chapter 9)?
Importantly, at production scale, designing and implementing a RAG pipeline
requires a robust set of DevOps (often called MLOps or LLMOps in the new era
of LLMs) best practices to ensure low latency, high availability, and strong security.
This includes the following:
• Continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) for RAG
•
Automated data refresh
Implementing event-driven extract, transform, load (ETL) processes that auto‐
matically trigger document ingestion updates with chunking, embedding, and
indexing into the RAG knowledge base whenever the source data is updated.
Automated evaluation
Integrating automated RAG evaluation into the CI/CD pipeline. This pre‐
vents deploying a new model, prompt, or data change that degrades response
quality.
6 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Prompt and model controls
Treating prompts as version-controlled artifacts (like code) and versioning
all components (e.g., the embedding model, the chunking logic, the LLM) to
ensure reproducibility and enable safe rollbacks.
Observability and monitoring
Using observability tools to trace a single request as it flows through the
RAG pipeline to enable debugging of “bad” responses.
Tracking the specific performance and cost of each component: ingestion,
retrieval, generation with the LLM (e.g. token usage), and overall cost per
query.
• Performance and scalability
•
Database optimization
Implementing efficient indexing strategies, sharding, or caching for any data‐
base included in your RAG stack, including the vector DB, graph database if
included, and lexicon if you implement hybrid search.
Optimized inference
Using dedicated, auto-scaling inference endpoints (e.g., using vLLM, dis‐
cussed in the section “Software or hardware acceleration” on page 111 in
Chapter 4, or provisioned throughput) for the embedding, reranking, and
generation of LLMs.
• Security and governance
•
Data-centric access control
Applying granular, role-based access controls (RBACs) at the data level,
ensuring the RAG pipeline only retrieves and presents documents that the
specific user is authorized to see.
Encryption at rest and in motion
Encrypting all the data stores as well as any API communications using
strong cryptographic standards.
Prompt and output sanitization
Implementing strict input validation to mitigate prompt injection attacks
and output filtering to scan for and redact PII or other sensitive data before
it reaches the user.
As we progress through the chapters of this book, we will tackle each of these
challenges and provide strategies for addressing them.
The Blueprint of a RAG Stack 
| 
7
Example: RAG with LangChain
Let’s show a quick example of how to build a simple RAG pipeline with LangChain,
grounded in the book Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll (this edition
published by VolumeOne Publishing).
We start with ingestion using these steps:
1. Download the PDF file and parse into text
1.
2. Split the full text of the book into chunks
2.
3. Compute vector embedding and store the resulting vectors and chunks in the
3.
vector database LanceDB.
from langchain_community.document_loaders import PyPDFLoader
from langchain_text_splitters import RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter
from langchain_openai import OpenAIEmbeddings, ChatOpenAI
from langchain_community.vectorstores import LanceDB
from langchain_core.prompts import ChatPromptTemplate
from langchain_core.output_parsers import StrOutputParser
from langchain_core.runnables import RunnablePassthrough
pdf_url = "https://www.adobe.com/be_en/active-use/pdf/Alice_in_Wonderland.pdf"
loader = PyPDFLoader(pdf_url)
pages = loader.load()
text_splitter = RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(
    chunk_size=1000,
    chunk_overlap=200,
    length_function=len,
)
chunks = text_splitter.split_documents(pages)
embeddings = OpenAIEmbeddings(model="text-embedding-3-small")
vectorstore = LanceDB.from_documents(chunks, embeddings)
Now we use LangChain to create the RAG pipeline. First, we define an llm object
(in this case using GPT-4o mini), and a retriever that retrieves the top three most
relevant results (chunks) from the LanceDB vector store. The RAG “chain” is then
composed of three steps:
1. Collect the chunks as “context” and then use the format_docs() function to
1.
format these chunks.
2. Integrate the chunks and question into the prompt.
2.
3. Call the llm.
3.
4. Format the output:
4.
8 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
llm = ChatOpenAI(model="gpt-4o-mini", temperature=0)
retriever = vectorstore.as_retriever(search_kwargs={"k": 3})
def format_docs(docs):
    return "\n\n".join(doc.page_content for doc in docs)
prompt = ChatPromptTemplate.from_template(
    """Answer the question based only on the following context:
{context}
Question: {question}"""
)
rag_chain = (
    {"context": retriever | format_docs, "question": RunnablePassthrough()}
    | prompt
    | llm
    | StrOutputParser()
)
Okay, now let’s try a query:
Query = "Describe the Mad Hatter's tea party."
answer = rag_chain.invoke(q)
print(answer)
And the output we get is
The Mad Hatter's tea party is a chaotic and nonsensical gathering set under a 
tree, where the March Hare, the Hatter, and a Dormouse are present. The table is 
large but crowded, with the three characters sitting closely together at one 
corner. The Dormouse is asleep, and the other two use it as a cushion while they
converse over its head. The atmosphere is filled with absurdity, as the March 
Hare offers Alice wine that isn't actually there, leading to a confrontation 
about manners. The Hatter makes a personal remark about Alice's hair, which she 
finds rude, and the conversation is marked by a lack of civility and logic. 
Alice, feeling frustrated and insulted, eventually leaves the tea party, 
declaring it the stupidest she has ever attended. The scene is characterized by 
whimsical elements, such as the peculiar house of the March Hare, which has 
chimneys shaped like ears and a fur thatched roof. Overall, the tea party 
embodies the surreal and illogical nature of Wonderland.
This is the most basic form of RAG—it’s quite simple to get started with a simple
example. We will spend the rest of the book continuously expanding this example, to
better understand how to take RAG from a simple POC to production.
Before we jump into the technical components of RAG in Chapter 2, let’s firmly
establish why RAG matters and how it compares against other approaches. The
rest of this chapter will tackle just that—the benefits of RAG, use cases, and when
choosing RAG makes sense.
Example: RAG with LangChain 
| 
9
RAG Versus Other Approaches
When first entering the world of LLMs and RAG, there are quite a few approaches
that look similar to RAG, at least in function, but they often have significant down‐
sides or are just too simplistic to support real-world, production-scale use cases.
Let’s discuss some of these alternative approaches in a bit more detail.
RAG Versus “Chat with PDF”
You may find that RAG looks similar to “chat with PDF”—a category of applications
that answer user queries based on a set of documents.
Although it’s certainly possible to implement a “chat with PDF” application using
RAG, most “chat with PDF” applications use the following simple (although non‐
scalable) approach: they put the full text of the PDF file into the LLM prompt, followed
by the questions. This approach works for small PDF files, as modern LLMs now
support a context length of 256K or even 1M tokens. In fact, you might be able to fit
tens or hundreds of PDF files into such a large context window. However, this clearly
does not scale to enterprise applications, where often there are hundreds of thousands
of documents available, and even very large context window sizes won’t be enough.
There are a few other limitations worth considering.
The first is cost: LLMs are expensive to run. By feeding all documents into the LLM,
you also feed information that is irrelevant to the query to the LLM, which is a waste.
Instead, RAG selectively feeds relevant information to the LLM, making it cheaper,
faster, and scalable to any size.
The second is latency: even LLMs that can process long sequence lengths may take a
while to process, resulting in high latencies and a frustrating user experience.
The third is document selection: imagine an enterprise application where we just want
to get an answer to a question, grounded in documents across Google Drive, Notion,
SharePoint, and a set of PDF files on S3. With “chat with PDF,” someone still has to
identify which documents are relevant and feed those into the LLM as mentioned
previously. Now we’re back to retrieval, and it starts looking exactly like RAG.
RAG Versus Fine-Tuning
Developers who leverage LLMs with proprietary data often consider using fine-tuning
to adapt a model to their specific domain. This process involves taking a general-
purpose pre-trained LLM and “continuing” its training on the private data. This
additional training, which typically runs for a few epochs, adjusts the model’s internal
parameters, specializing its knowledge, terminology, and response style to the new data.
So what are the challenges faced with fine-tuning?
10 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Expertise gap
First and foremost, fine-tuning is a difficult task, which requires careful preparation
of the data and deep expertise in deep learning to avoid issues like overfitting, regres‐
sion in general competencies of the LLM, inadvertently introducing biases presented
in the new data into the model, or adding AI safety risks.
Most modern LLMs undergo continued training past the initial
large-scale “pre-training,” including techniques like supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning with human feed‐
back (RLHF), and frontier lab researchers attempt to balance
the model across all these tasks. Fine-tuning, as described here,
can reverse or interfere with these post-training regimes, causing
regressions in many dimensions if great care is not taken.
Even if you have a team with the required level of expertise in deep learning, your
data may just not be large enough or clean enough for effective fine-tuning.
Cost of fine-tuning
In addition to the expertise gap, fine-tuning tends to be quite expensive (in terms
of GPU cost), and you must ask yourself: how often do I need to fine-tune? If your
dataset is static, then it’s not much of an issue—you fine-tune once and you are
good to go. But in most real-world enterprise use cases, data often gets updated
frequently—would you fine-tune every day? Once a week? That is unlikely to be a
cost-effective solution.
Access controls and permissions
Another often overlooked, but quite important, advantage of the RAG approach
is that of access controls. Imagine you have a dataset that includes documents
from multiple departments: engineering, HR, finance, and legal. If you try to use
fine-tuning, you effectively incorporate all this data into the model weights.
Now what if an employee of the company asks a question and the fine-tuned LLM
responds based on confidential information that should only be available to the CEO
or the HR department? With fine-tuning, the information is one single “blob,” and
you cannot separate documents that should be visible to the CEO from those that are
globally visible to all employees.
We like to think of this as the Borg effect (“We are the Borg. Resistance is futile”)—
just as the Borg in Star Trek assimilate or integrate beings, cultures, and technology
into the Collective, fine-tuning integrates all the knowledge it trains on into the
model weights, making it difficult to maintain data segmentation and access control.
RAG Versus Other Approaches 
| 
11
This can lead to unintended exposure of sensitive data across departments, and is a
security concern of most enterprises.
Of course, you might consider fine-tuning different LLMs, using data accessible to
each user group or department. But that results in multiple LLMs being fine-tuned—
and each needs to be hosted separately. This is resource-intensive and requires rout‐
ing of queries to ensure that the intended model is being accessed for each case.
Overall, this approach is not scalable, and quickly adds to cost and complexity.
In contrast, with RAG, you can easily implement access controls within the retrieval
step by adding permission-based metadata fields in the data store and using filtering
at query time (see “Key Benefits of RAG”).
There is nothing that prevents you from using a fine-tuned LLM
as part of your RAG stack. If you have a lot of internal data, you
believe that fine-tuning it will result in significant gains, and your
team has the expertise to properly fine-tune an LLM on your data,
as well as host it for use in your RAG pipeline—then you can use
that fine-tuned LLM in the generative step of RAG instead of a
standard LLM.
To summarize, “chat with PDF” and fine-tuning are valid approaches in some cases,
but have significant limitations when it comes to enterprise deployments. Now,
instead of comparing other approaches, let’s highlight the key benefits of RAG
and what makes it a great approach for mission-critical and large-scale enterprise
applications.
Key Benefits of RAG
Now that you understand how RAG compares to other potential approaches, let’s
discuss the main benefits of RAG itself in more detail.
RAG Is Scalable and Efficient
RAG is an efficient approach for grounding generative AI applications in pri‐
vate datasets that easily scales to hundreds of thousands, millions, or even more
documents.
The retrieval engine at the core of the RAG makes this possible. Search is a hard
problem that has been researched for decades, providing ample approaches that can
be used in RAG. And we know that search (and thus RAG) provides a path to
scale with the number of documents—a feat impossible for an LLM alone, whose
self-attention mechanism scales quadratically with its sequence length due to its use
of the (now famous) self-attention mechanism.
12 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Note, however, that while the retrieval algorithm itself can scale efficiently (often
sublinearly with modern indexing), the overall system’s real-world scalability in pro‐
duction is often dictated by engineering bottlenecks, including database concurrency
or network latency.
RAG Helps Reduce Hallucinations
Hallucination describes the scenario when an LLM generates content that is unsup‐
ported by either its own world knowledge or the information fed to its prompt.
Due to its design, RAG helps reduce hallucinations as compared to asking an LLM in
a closed-book fashion. The reason is this: because we provide LLM with a set of facts
retrieved from the source dataset that are relevant for the user query, it will (if built
properly) use those facts to provide a good answer.
When relevant facts are not available, most RAG applications are instructed to just
respond with “I don’t know.” In contrast, an LLM will almost always provide some
response based on its training set, and if it does not have that information, it will in
many cases, make something up.
RAG Enables Explainability
RAG uses retrieved information to answer user queries, so it is a common practice to
implement citations (like “[3,5]”) at the end of each sentence generated by the RAG
pipeline, if requested to do so. These citations increase user trust by allowing them to
verify the claims, but also allow them to better discriminate between hallucinations
(when the model made something up) and bad data (where a retrieved document
included erroneous information).
An LLM in a RAG application can be further instructed, through proper prompts,
to explain how it reaches an answer by processing the retrieved information and rea‐
soning about it. Such high explainability is unmatchable when an LLM only uses its
parametric knowledge (extracted from its training set) to answer questions because it
is almost impossible to reconstruct the source from neural network weights.
Near-Instant Addition and Removal of Knowledge
The quality of the response generated by an LLM in RAG depends on the quality
and relevance of retrieved data that is fed into the LLM. Because this retrieved data
is stored in a system external to the LLM, it can trivially be updated using traditional
ETL methods, which means the knowledge accessible to the LLM can be easily
updated on a regular basis.
The LLM will have no memory of the knowledge given to it. It only needs the right
facts to be retrieved at query time.
Key Benefits of RAG 
| 
13
Compare that to using a frontier model or a fine-tuned model, where, in order to
integrate new data or remove/update existing data, retraining is required—making
it nearly impossible to do in practice (although we note there is some academic
research on machine unlearning that may help address this challenge in the future).
Access Controls and Security
With RAG, you can implement access controls by adding permission information to
documents during ingestion (e.g., as metadata), so we can direct the query flow to
include or exclude certain documents based on their permissions.
Properly supporting access controls is often a critical requirement in an enterprise
application of RAG, preventing leakage of data that a user is not authorized to see
into the RAG responses.
RAG offers capabilities that are very attractive to enterprise applications, especially
for organizations that are required to provide strict access controls and strong
security, and, most importantly, that care about response quality and reduced
hallucinations.
Let’s look at some of the specific enterprise use cases for RAG.
RAG Use Cases
This ability to utilize the power of LLMs while augmenting them with private data
makes RAG applicable to nearly any situation where an LLM will be used inside an
enterprise, because most enterprise applications require access to their own private
data.
That is not to say that ChatGPT, Claude, or Gemini are not useful as stand-alone tools
for employees—they are. They can be used effectively to improve one’s productivity:
for coding, marketing, or other tasks that require general world knowledge, and
many other uses.
But for any applications where the LLM needs access to internal data, RAG is best.
Let’s review some common enterprise RAG use cases.
Virtual Assistants and AI Chatbots
Virtual assistants and chatbots can serve as the first line of customer interaction. They
can function either as an external tool interacting directly with customers or as an
internal tool that supports customer service associates.
14 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Here is a simplified example. In an airline, customer support agents may use a virtual
assistant to help them with their daily tasks, providing answers to common questions
they may face when speaking to customers on the phone. A different chatbot can
be deployed externally, directly serving the airline customers with any question they
have.
In this use case, it is common to point your RAG application to relevant internal
knowledge bases, such as previous customer support logs, airline FAQ or website
information, as well as other internal documents around company policies.
Deploying virtual assistants in this manner often shows a positive impact on cus‐
tomer service metrics, helping to dramatically reduce response times, reduce the
overall volume of support tickets, and increase first-contact resolution rates. The
technology ensures that every interaction is informed by the most current and com‐
prehensive data, thereby elevating the overall customer experience.
The number of applications that chatbots and virtual assistants can serve is quite
large. As long as you have an appropriate dataset that encapsulates the knowledge you
want to ground the assistant on, you can simply point your RAG application to that
dataset and deploy a virtual assistant.
As another example of this common use case, let’s look at education. Universities and
schools can deploy a chatbot to help answer student questions. It is nearly impossible
for every student to have access to a teacher or tutor at any time. Using an AI
assistant built with RAG, we can provide every student with a teacher for any subject,
anytime and anywhere. Just connect a RAG system to course materials authorized or
created by the teacher, such as textbooks or notes; then, the assistant will be able to
answer a student’s questions in the scope of such resources.
Figure 1-3 shows a RAG-powered intelligent tutoring and adaptive learning platform.
First (triangle 1), course materials are fed into the ingestion server, which processes
them and stores them into the vector DB. Then the agent can interact with a student
through chatting, as either a tutor (triangle 2) or an examiner (triangle 3). In the
tutor mode, the student asks questions and the agent replies with answers. For every
question the student asks, the agent mobilizes its LLM and queries the vector DB to
generate the answer. In the examiner mode, it proactively generates questions for the
student and grades the student’s responses. It can even generate new questions based
on areas needing improvement to reinforce the student’s understanding of the chosen
knowledge.
RAG Use Cases 
| 
15
Figure 1-3. A RAG-powered intelligent tutoring and adaptive learning platform
Enterprise Knowledge Management and Internal Search
In an enterprise setting, employees often face the challenge of finding the right
information amid vast and diverse data sources, especially as data is often stored
in multiple systems: as files on Google Drive, Notion, Salesforce, HubSpot, Jira,
Confluence, etc.
RAG modernizes enterprise search by combining the strength of retrieval, which was
common in traditional enterprise search systems, with an LLM that adds generation
and information processing/reasoning capabilities. By ingesting all relevant enter‐
prise data sources into your RAG application, when an employee submits a query—
regarding policy details, historical meeting documents, or technical specifications—
the system extracts the most relevant content, and then generates a clear response.
This process replaces the traditional, often time-consuming process of looking at the
top 10 results of a search, and reading each of those documents, while trying to form
a coherent and accurate response in your own head.
16 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
The benefits for companies using this approach are manifold. Employees save time
that would otherwise be spent sifting through numerous documents, and avoid miss‐
ing critical information. This efficiency gain boosts overall productivity and allows
teams to focus on higher-value tasks rather than administrative searches.
By continuously keeping your data sources refreshed and up to date, RAG-
based knowledge management systems keep pace with rapid changes within an
organization.
Automated Content Creation and Document Summarization
Content creation in enterprises is quite common, including tasks like generating
internal reports and creating marketing articles or blog posts. These types of tasks
often require meticulous research and fact-checking.
RAG offers a powerful solution by automating the creation process. When tasked
with generating content, the RAG system retrieves the latest, relevant data from
multiple sources and uses it to produce well-structured drafts or summaries, which
can then be reviewed if needed by a human. This can dramatically reduce the amount
of time and effort required for manual research, and often results in more accurate
content.
The positive impact extends to brand reputation as well. With content that is accurate
and promptly generated, companies can maintain a consistent and authoritative
voice across all channels. This level of responsiveness and reliability can be a major
competitive advantage over legacy processes that may take longer (competing with
other priorities) and result in less accurate artifacts.
Generating Attractive and Effective Personalized Ads
Advertisements need to be attractive and effective. Conventionally, the same ad is
delivered to all its target audiences without factoring in what the user is doing or
talking about online. With RAG, we can generate ads with more up-to-date and
personalized information that differ from person to person and are potentially more
effective.
Figure 1-4 depicts a RAG-powered system to generate compelling ads on the fly
based on user context, e.g., what the user was/is chatting about, watching, or brows‐
ing. For example, if a user is chatting about running, products related to running or
sports will be pulled from the pre-ingested vector DB, and a personalized ad will be
generated using both the product information and the context about the user (e.g.,
their previous purchases).
RAG Use Cases 
| 
17
Figure 1-4. A RAG-powered pipeline for generating personalized ads on the fly
The advantage of RAG-powered ad generation is clear: we can use the powerful
semantic search in RAG for production recommendations, and not only show the
products but create ads for those products that match what we know about that user.
This ensures that each ad emphasizes the most relevant selling points for individual
users.
As an example, let’s say we want to advertise Acme Shoes, which are designed for
both safety and hygiene. For a user who was recently chatting about foot odor and is
now talking about soccer, the ad can begin with addressing the odor pain point with
something like “Love soccer, but hate foot odor? Acme shoes are specially engineered
to suppress microbes that cause odor.” To another user who was talking about safety,
the ad can be “You don’t wanna give up safety to stay in shape. Acme shoes have
reflective strips to protect you.”
Question-Answering Systems
Question-answering systems are designed to deliver precise answers to user queries
by synthesizing information from diverse datasets, using RAG.
Unlike chatbots or virtual assistants, which support multiturn conversations, the form
factor here is that of a single question and single answer.
One common use case of question answering is for helping respond to requests
for proposals (RFPs) or requests for information (RFIs). In the competitive sales
landscape, speed and accuracy in responding to customer inquiries and proposal
requests are critical. When a sales team needs to prepare a tailored proposal, the
RAG system pulls relevant historical data, product specifications, pricing details,
and customer interactions from internal databases, and then constructs a coherent,
customized response.
18 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
The positive impact is clear, and the benefits are considerable. Sales teams can
produce high-quality proposals in a fraction of the time needed for manual processes,
thereby increasing their responsiveness and competitiveness. This automation mini‐
mizes the risk of human error and ensures that each proposal is backed by the latest
and most accurate data (as opposed to copy-pasting from the previous proposal,
where data may not be up to date), leading to improved win rates and stronger
customer relationships.
Medical and Healthcare Applications
In the healthcare sector, timely and accurate information can be a matter of life and
death.
When a clinician needs to quickly review treatment guidelines or patient histories,
a RAG application can retrieve relevant case studies, research articles, as well as the
patient’s medical record and all physician notes to generate a concise, evidence-based
response.
That response can even be tailored to each physician’s specialty. For example, the
summary might be different if you are a cardiovascular surgeon or a dermatology
specialist—the information relevant to each is different.
By providing an accurate and contextualized medical summary, combining historical
medical records with up-to-date medical information, we can help physicians be
more effective in treating patients, reduce the likelihood of missing critical informa‐
tion such as an allergy, and overall provide better treatment to their patients.
For healthcare providers, as well as insurance companies, the benefits are substantial.
The time needed to make informed decisions is reduced, and thereby, patient out‐
comes are improved. RAG systems also help to reduce the cognitive load experienced
by clinicians by presenting synthesized, easily digestible information instead of over‐
whelming raw data.
And, of course, patients benefit from more precise and personalized care. With faster
access to critical insights and a reduced risk of outdated or incorrect information,
medical practitioners can deliver treatments that are both timely and effective.
Importantly, the deployment of such powerful applications in production is predica‐
ted on two non-negotiable principles: rigorous adherence to Health Insurance Porta‐
bility and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliance to protect patient privacy, and a
robust “human-in-the-loop” (HITL) framework to ensure that a qualified clinician
always validates the AI’s output before it informs a life-critical decision.
RAG Use Cases 
| 
19
Legal and Compliance Research
Many regulated industries, like healthcare and financial services, are required to
comply with various laws and regulations. Understanding the full complexity of
each legal requirement and regulation, and how it applies to your business, is often
complex and requires legal research where precision and reliability are paramount, as
errors can lead to significant financial or reputational damage.
A RAG-based system can assist legal and regulatory professionals by quickly retriev‐
ing relevant case law, statutes, and internal compliance documents. This approach
greatly improves upon traditional legal research methods, which often rely on manual
searches through legal texts and databases, as well as internal data sources.
The benefits for legal professionals are immense. By automating a significant portion
of the research process, RAG enables faster turnaround times on legal opinions,
compliance reports, and case preparations. This efficiency not only reduces labor
costs but also minimizes the risk of overlooking critical information.
In the last few sections, we covered the basics of RAG, and its main use cases. Later in
the book, we will also cover more advanced forms of RAG. The next section will give
you a preview of some of these advanced techniques.
Advanced RAG
First introduced in a Facebook/Meta 2020 paper, at the 34th Conference on Neu‐
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), RAG was a simple concept limited
to text-only data, using fine-tuning instead of in-context learning. This founda‐
tional vision, however, was pivotal and paved the way for the technology’s future
development.
Since then, RAG has progressed into a more advanced and powerful form. The
rest of this book will cover more advanced techniques in RAG, like agentic RAG
(Chapter 7), multimodal RAG (Chapter 8), as well as knowledge graphs (Chapter 9).
Here, we offer a quick overview of some of these techniques.
Agentic RAG
Agentic RAG is an evolution of RAG: instead of a one-shot process to retrieve
relevant information and generate a response, agentic RAG incorporates autonomous
AI agents into the pipeline. These agents add capabilities such as the following:
Iterative and multi-step retrieval
Instead of fetching context only once, agents can re-retrieve and refine the
information if the initial data isn’t sufficient.
20 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Dynamic tool integration
Agentic RAG can leverage multiple external tools (like web search or API calls)
to access varied sources of knowledge, rather than relying solely on pre-ingested
knowledge. In its simplest form, agentic RAG makes the retrieval in RAG a tool
that the model can call one or more times, enabling the agent to reformulate
the user query or to enable multiturn conversations, where information from
previous exchanges can be leveraged to improve the responses.
Advanced reasoning and adaptability
The agents can decompose complex queries, plan retrieval strategies, validate
information, and even coordinate among specialized subagents to handle multi‐
part tasks.
Agentic RAG offers greater flexibility and robustness for handling complex, multi‐
faceted queries by dynamically orchestrating several retrieval and reasoning steps. We
will talk more about agentic RAG in Chapter 7.
Multimodal RAG
Initially, RAG was only used with textual information. Since then, RAG has been
expanded to cover other modalities, such as tables, diagrams, and charts. There are
usually two approaches to incorporating these other modalities.
The first approach is to convert all information modalities into text (e.g., images to
their captions), and then run the well-understood RAG pipeline in the text domain
only.
The other is to leverage multimodal embedding models and language models, such as
vision–language models (VLMs), or multimodal large language models (MLLMs). In
this approach, information in non-textual domains remains in their original modal‐
ity. This information is then provided to the VLM at query time and used to generate
the response alongside textual data.
A more end-to-end approach on the rise recently is embedding the entire page and
sending pages into an MLLM for generating the response. We will explain more in
Chapter 8.
RAG with Knowledge Graphs
The RAG examples we have discussed so far use digitized text as is. This conventional
approach can struggle with “connecting the dots” across complex datasets. To address
this limitation, an advanced strategy involves leveraging knowledge graphs (KGs), an
approach that has been popularized by graph database vendors.
Rather than relying solely on flat text embeddings, integrating KGs involves first
processing unstructured documents to extract key entities and their relationships.
Advanced RAG 
| 
21
These connections are then used to construct a knowledge graph. This structured
representation enables the system to support multi-hop reasoning (connecting differ‐
ent pieces of information, often across multiple documents, to reach conclusions
not obvious from a single source) and provides deeper context awareness when
answering complex queries.
Popularized by Microsoft, another approach involving KGs is known as GraphRAG,
which was proposed to address the complexity of building KGs manually. GraphRAG
first processes unstructured documents to extract entities and relationships, and
constructs a knowledge graph that captures the inherent connections within the data,
as we will see in Chapter 9.
Conclusion
This chapter introduced RAG, a common and effective approach to overcoming
the inherent limitations of large language models. While LLMs excel in generating
responses, writing code, and answering questions based on the extensive data they
were trained on, they fall short when it comes to handling proprietary, up-to-date, or
niche information that lies outside their training set.
RAG addresses this by integrating real-time data retrieval into the generative process,
ensuring responses are grounded in relevant, external information.
We introduced the architecture of a RAG system, outlining both the ingestion and
query flows, and the different steps in each flow.
We then reviewed alternatives to RAG (such as fine-tuning) and discussed the pros/
cons of each approach, finishing up with a discussion of the benefits of RAG, the
main use cases for RAG in the enterprise, and some advanced techniques (which we’ll
discuss in much more detail later in this book).
Building a RAG application requires a lot of learning—from new types of system
components like vector databases to models like embedding, LLMs, and more. The
rest of this book is dedicated to diving deep into each of these components to gain
a better understanding of how each of these components works in practice and
what is required to scale them to enterprise use cases. Throughout the book, we will
not only cover theoretical concepts but also highlight the gap between conceptual
understanding and production deployment, covering operational challenges, cost
optimization, monitoring strategies, and proven architectural patterns.
22 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
CHAPTER 2
The Base RAG Stack
In Chapter 1, we introduced the core idea of retrieval-augmented generation: ena‐
bling large language models to access external knowledge rather than relying solely
on what they learned during training. In this chapter, we take a deeper dive into the
technical components that allow a RAG system to function in practice. These compo‐
nents form a pipeline where data flows —often referred to as the RAG stack—that
spans from preparing raw documents to generating high-quality, context-grounded
responses.
We begin by examining the two major flows that define every RAG system: the
ingestion flow, which transforms and stores data for supplying an LLM with unseen
knowledge in the future, and the query flow, which activates at inference time to
serve user requests. Each step in these flows—parsing, chunking, embedding, index‐
ing, vector search, reranking, and LLM-based generation—plays a distinct role and
comes with its own trade-offs. Understanding these pieces is essential to diagnosing
errors, improving quality, and designing scalable RAG architectures that behave
predictably in production environments.
As we walk through each layer, we will not only describe the concepts but also
illustrate them with real code examples, practical guidance, and the rationale behind
common design choices. By the end of this chapter, you will have a clear picture
of how the base RAG stack works end-to-end and how its components interact to
deliver accurate, efficient, and trustworthy AI-powered information retrieval.
RAG Stack Flows
As we saw in Chapter 1, the basic RAG stack has two major flows: the ingestion flow
and the query flow. The ingestion flow is usually run once when new data is available
or when the existing data needs to be updated. The query flow is triggered every time
23
