a user sends a query to the RAG system, and uses the data prepared in the ingestion
flow to respond to user queries.
The Ingestion Flow
In the ingestion flow, source documents are pre-processed (i.e., parsed and chunked),
and the product of this pre-processing is stored in a way that enables efficient
searching and retrieval later, for an LLM to fulfill a task or respond to the user query.
The ingestion flow typically consists of four steps: parsing, chunking, embedding, and
indexing (Figure 2-1).
Figure 2-1. Major components or steps in the ingestion flow; note that in production
systems, these steps are typically orchestrated asynchronously with retries
The data for ingestion can come from various sources, such as databases, files (local
or cloud), APIs, or web scraping. Data from databases and APIs is generally easier to
ingest because it is structured. In these cases, the schema—which defines the fields
and data types—is known in advance. For example, if you were to ingest conversa‐
tions between an LLM and users, we know in advance that each message has a role
field (whether the message is from the LLM or a user) and a timestamp in addition
to the message text itself, and that a conversation is a list of such compound message
objects. Preprocessing of data from databases or APIs is usually easy and minimal,
and may include, for example, flattening a nested structure and discarding fields that
are not useful for your RAG tasks from further ingestion steps. In the example of
ingesting LLM–user conversations, we may flatten conversations into a 2D table of
24 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
four columns: the message text, the role (who sent the message, the user or the LLM),
the timestamp, and conversation ID, which is used to correspond messages belonging
to the same conversation. Only the message text will be embedded for semantic
search down the road.
In contrast, the preprocessing of files, except pure text files (e.g., *.txt), can be more
complex, because they can come in various formats (PDF, DOCX, PPTX, HTML,
etc.), which contain more information than what you want RAG to operate on.
For example, in Microsoft Word documents, the formatting and styling information
is usually not meaningful to RAG, and thus needs to be identified and discarded.
Another challenge in ingesting files is that the textual or tabular data you want might
include scanned images, which require techniques like optical character recognition
(OCR) to extract the text. The process of separating information of different modali‐
ties and purposes and extracting only the ones that you need is called parsing. We will
cover these topics in detail in “Document Parsing” on page 28.
Parsing yields discrete text segments that provide the necessary context for the LLM
to generate accurate responses. However, these segments are often too long for LLMs
to process in one go, due to reasons such as context window size, cost, and the
effectiveness of LLMs. Also, most questions need to only attend to a tiny fraction of
the lengthy raw segments from documents. A lengthy context is not only wasteful
but may backfire, e.g., by reducing the retrieval effectiveness. Therefore, we need to
break them down into smaller pieces called chunks. The process of breaking them
into chunks is called chunking, which we will cover in “Text Chunking” on page 37.
Up to this point, your data remains in its original form (a text is still a linear sequence
of characters) or modality, which may make searching and retrieval ineffective. For
example, if your query text is “United States,” then you won’t be able to match it with
“USA” in the character space directly. Or, if your query text is “Silicon Valley,” you
won’t be able to find Chinese documents containing “硅谷” or “矽谷” directly using
string comparison. One way to improve the searchability is to convert the text into a
vector of numbers that captures its semantic meaning. This process and its output are
called embedding (or, more precisely, dense embedding or vector embedding), which
we will cover in “Embedding Models” on page 43.
Besides embedding, which transforms data to numerical vectors, there are other ways
to improve searchability without transforming the data representation or format,
such as using inverted indices or keyword-based indexing. These methods are more
traditional and often used in search engines, but they may not capture the semantic
meaning of the text as effectively as embeddings do. However, they can complement
embeddings in certain scenarios, such as finding contracts with a particular business
whose name has never been seen before. Another example is tolerating typos in user
queries, where keyword-based indexing can help match queries with similar terms.
RAG Stack Flows 
| 
25
These methods will be detailed later in Chapter 3, in the section “Hybrid Search” on
page 76.
Together with embedding, all methods to transform and organize information for fast
and easy retrieval later are put under the umbrella of indexing, which allows for fast
lookups and efficient use of resources when searching through large datasets.
Representation of information is just the first step to improving searchability. For
dense embeddings, the next step is to store these embeddings in a way that allows
for efficient retrieval. This is where vector databases come in, which we will cover in
“Vector Databases” on page 51.
The Query Flow
After the ingestion flow, the RAG stack is ready to respond to your user’s query
using the ingested data. The query can be a question, a command, a sequence of
instructions, or any task that you want the RAG stack to perform. For example,
“Write a poem based on my travels in 2025.”
The power of RAG is in enabling LLMs to respond to queries that require knowledge
unseen in their training data. An off-the-shelf LLM may not know who you are, nor
where you were in 2025. However, if you have ingested your 2025 diary or blog posts
into the RAG stack, then it can retrieve information about your travels in 2025 from
these documents and provide them to the LLM to generate a poem based on them.
Figure 2-2 shows the steps in the query flow.
Figure 2-2. Major components or steps of the query flow
The first step in the query flow is query rewriting—the process of transforming a user
query into a format that improves the LLM’s performance. For example, the query
“Write a poem based on my travels in 2025” has two parts: “Write a poem” and “based
on my travels in 2025.” The first part is a command, while the second part is a context
to be retrieved and sent to the LLM to fulfill the command. If “write a poem” is
included in the retrieval query, it may lead to irrelevant results, such as retrieving
26 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
poems not about travel and 2025 and leaving non-poem info about travel and 2025
out. Then, the LLM may end up giving you a poem based on other poems, but not
about travel or 2025. Therefore, we need to rewrite the query to focus on the context
part, which is “my travels in 2025.” Let’s call the query used for information retrieval
the retrieval query, to distinguish it from the original user query.
The next step is to retrieve relevant information based on the retrieval query. There
are usually two search categories: semantic search (also called dense retrieval) and
keyword search (also called sparse retrieval).
In semantic search, the retrieval query is converted into an embedding vector, which
is then used to search for similar vectors in the vector database. The similarity
between two vectors can be efficiently measured using a mathematical operation
called a dot product, which is also known as the inner product or scalar product.
Today’s embedding models almost all produce normalized or unit embedding vectors,
whose magnitudes are 1. When two vectors in the dot product operation are unit
vectors, the dot product is equivalent to cosine similarity, which measures how
aligned the directions of the two vectors are.
Keyword search is a group of search techniques, such as term frequency–inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF) and BM25 (BM stands for best matching), developed
long before semantic search. Unlike semantic search, which requires converting
strings to vectors and operates on the vector space, keyword search directly matches
strings, and thus operates in the lexicon space. Modern embedding models can also
generate vectors representing words or phrases for matching purposes. To distinguish
such vectors from dense embedding vectors, we refer to them as sparse vectors.
Both semantic and keyword searches have strengths and weaknesses. To combine
the best of both worlds, you can use a combination of both, which is called hybrid
search. In the base stack (which is the subject of this chapter), we focus on pure
semantic search, while hybrid search (for better robustness on rare tokens, typos, and
compliance with exact-match constraints) will be discussed in Chapter 3.
For cost and effectiveness reasons, we want to pick the most relevant and informative
chunks and feed them to the LLM. This sounds easy, right? Just rank chunks based on
their similarity scores with the retrieval query and pick the top ones. Unfortunately,
it’s not that simple. There are many reasons that the ranking using embedding models
may not be optimal for the LLM, and, hence, we often apply an additional step of
reranking.
First, retrieval models may return multiple chunks that convey redundant informa‐
tion. Sending all of these to the LLM wastes both token budget and computation. This
problem has been observed since long before the emergence of LLMs. The maximum
marginal relevance (MMR) reranker, which balances relevance with diversity to
reduce redundancy among selected chunks, was developed in 1998.
RAG Stack Flows 
| 
27
Second, for semantic search, the dot product similarity scores used in embedding-
based retrieval do not fully exploit the attention mechanism that underlies LLMs.
Embedding models represent each text independently, and their similarity is meas‐
ured post hoc via vector operations.
In contrast to embedding models, transformer-based rerankers evaluate the query
and candidate chunk jointly, allowing cross-attention to better capture nuanced rela‐
tionships, context alignment, and semantic relevance between the two texts.
Once retrieval is finished, we are finally ready to send the chunks to the generative
LLM, which will inspect the original user query in the context of the retrieved chunks
to generate a response. We’ll cover this step in detail in “Generative LLMs” on page 55.
Next, we will look in detail at each layer of the RAG stack.
Document Parsing
Quite often, the text data you want to use in RAG is not in a simple text format, but
rather in formats such as PDF, PPTX, DOCX, HTML, and Markdown. In the case
of these formats, the text containing knowledge to answer your RAG queries is often
mixed with typesetting/styling information, such as fonts, which may not be useful
for answering your RAG queries.
PDF files are particularly challenging, in that a page inside one consists of individual
characters and their coordinates. Not only do you want to exclude the coordinates
from RAG ingestion, but also, the characters need to be concatenated into words or
sentences based on their coordinates. In some more challenging cases, the text of
interest may be an image scanned from a paper document, which requires techniques
like optical character recognition to extract the text. OCR accuracy heavily depends
on the image quality (resolution and clarity), the complexity and style of the fonts
used, and the layout itself.
The step separating the text that contains the knowledge we want to use in RAG
from the rest is called document parsing. It’s called parsing because such formats
follow designated syntaxes or structures, like a computer program, and we need to
syntactically determine the segments of text that contain the knowledge we want to
use in RAG.
It is critical to correctly parse all of these file formats, as accuracy at this stage
is paramount, and any errors or inconsistencies at ingestion will compromise the
integrity and reliability of the RAG system’s knowledge base and its ability to provide
quality responses to user queries.
28 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
1 The only exception is tagged PDF files, which are designed for accessible reasons and do have structures.
Extracting Text from Various File Formats
Let’s start with PDF files, one of the most common types of documents ingested into
RAG.
Rooted in the PostScript language, the PDF was fundamentally designed to render the
visual appearance of a document, not its logical structure. For this reason, most PDF
files1 do not contain a schema or hierarchical content. Instead, a word is stored as a
collection of individual characters with 2D coordinates, which is why text extraction
is so challenging.
This is also why extracting words, sentences, or paragraphs from PDF files requires
complex algorithms that analyze relationships between coordinates of characters. For
example, to tell whether a page has two columns, you need to analyze the clustering
and alignment of all characters on the page. Otherwise, you may mix lines across two
columns, resulting in unmeaningful sentences.
Fortunately, there are many libraries that can help. A single Google search, like “PDF
text extraction library,” will yield numerous solutions, including popular libraries like
pypdf (including PyPDF2, PyPDF3, and PyPDF4—it’s a crazy history!), PyMuPDF,
and pdfminer.six (the community edition of PDFMiner). Adobe, the inventor of the
PDF, also provides a commercial product called the PDF Extract API that parses a
PDF file into a JSON string. Unstructured.io is a startup whose offerings include PDF
extractors.
Quite often, a PDF file originates from scanned documents, where every page is a
picture. To get textual or tabular info out of such pages, OCR needs to be utilized.
Tesseract is one of the most famous open source libraries for OCR, and hyperscalers
like Google Cloud or Microsoft Azure also offer OCR APIs. In addition, there are
quite a number of startups focused on OCR, such as Reducto.ai.
Compared to the PDF, the DOCX or HTML formats are relatively easier to work
with, as they belong to the family of XML formats, where information and their
attributes (such as font size, color, etc.) are interleaved and stored in a structured way.
For example, in HTML, the text “The capital of France is Paris.” is represented as The
capital of France is <b>Paris</b>. In this case, the <b> tag indicates that the text
“Paris” should be displayed in bold. However, the <b> tag probably isn’t needed when
answering the query “What is the capital of France?” So, during parsing, we want to
discard the <b> tag and return only the text “The capital of France is Paris.”
There are many libraries available for parsing and extracting text from DOCX and
HTML files, such as python-docx for DOCX files and Beautiful Soup for HTML files,
Document Parsing 
| 
29
and like PDF files, DOCX or HTML are also container formats that may include
multimodal data like tables or images (which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 8).
It is not always true that tags and attributes should be discarded. Some tags or
attributes can provide useful clues down the pipeline. Say the text to be processed is a
chat log like this:
<div class="chat-log">
    <div class="user" id="msg1">What is the capital of France?</div>
    <div class="AI" id="msg2">The capital of France is Paris.</div>
    <div class="user" id="msg3">What language is spoken there?</div>
    <div class="AI" id="msg4">French.</div>
</div>
If we discard the tags and attributes, we lose the context of who said what and when.
Later, if the query is “According to AI, where does the President of France live?”, we
will not be able to answer.
A better solution is to record the class as metadata, as shown in Table 2-1.
Table 2-1. Record the class as metadata
Text to ingest
Metadata (in JSON)
What is the capital of France?
{"who":"user"}
The capital of France is Paris
{"who":"AI"}
Metadata is additional information about the text segment that can be used to pro‐
vide context or other useful information. We will see how to store metadata in vector
databases in “Vector Databases” on page 51.
During query rewriting, you can now split the query into a main query (“where does
the President of France live”) that will be used for semantic search, and a metadata
filter that constrains “who” to the value “AI”; in this way, messages from the user,
even if they said things about the French capital, will be excluded from the retrieval.
Metadata filtering is a database operation similar to the where clause in SQL—it has
nothing to do with semantic search.
Document Parsing with Vision–Language Models
Today’s LLMs, such as GPT-5.x series, can process non-textual data. To distinguish
from an LLM that only processes textual data, we sometimes use the term vision–
language models (VLMs) to denote a model that can process both visual information
(still images or videos) and texts. A VLM can be leveraged to directly parse various
file formats.
This approach is especially useful for documents with complex layouts such as slides,
forms, or infographics. However, do exercise this option with great caution. VLMs
30 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
may not always be accurate in extracting text. Due to their generative nature, they
are prone to hallucination, and, as of today, often cannot reproduce the images in
documents that are given to them. Using a VLM for parsing may be quite expensive
and slow for large, enterprise-scale datasets.
Therefore, this approach should be reserved for difficult, high-value document types
or as a fallback when classical parsers fail. We’d recommend a “cheapest successful
parser-first” strategy (PDF libs, HTML parsers, OCR) before calling a VLM.
Code Example: Parsing Files
Now let’s walk through three coding examples: parsing PDF files with PyMuPDF,
parsing DOCX files with python-docx, and parsing PDF files using GPT-5.1. The
working Jupyter notebooks can be found in the GitHub repo of this chapter.
Working with PDF files in PyMuPDF
PyMuPDF is a powerful library for working with PDF files in Python. The documen‐
tation of PyMuPDF provides detailed examples on how to extract text, images, and
tables from PDF files. Here, we briefly go over some examples.
As mentioned earlier, in PDF files, text is not a sequence of characters. Instead,
characters are stored individually. It is the job of PyMuPDF to group characters based
on their proximity.
The following code iterates through a PDF file and extracts all text on each page as
one string:
with pymupdf.open("sample_data/sample_data.pdf") as doc:
  for page in doc:
    text: str = page.get_text()
    print(text, end="---")
The output will look like this:
Sample doc for RAG Book Chapter 2
This is a great chapter 
Revision
Year
0.0.1
2025
Book
Revision
Year
Author
Memory and RAG
0.1.0
2026
A great researcher
RAG and AI
Document Parsing 
| 
31
0.0.1
2025
---
Clearly, this is not ideal because the text from the table is mixed with regular,
unstructured text.
One way to improve things is to extract the text by block, where a block is a collection
of text that PyMuPDF groups together.
with pymupdf.open("sample_data/sample_data.pdf") as doc:
  for page in doc:
    text: str = page.get_text("blocks")
    for block in text:
      print(block[4], end="---\n")
To make the block boundaries clear, we purposefully end each block with ---\n. The
output will look like this:
Sample doc for RAG Book Chapter 2
---
This is a great chapter 
---
Revision
Year
0.0.1
2025
---
Book
Revision
Year
Author
Memory and RAG
0.1.0
2026
A great researcher
RAG and AI
0.0.1
2025
---
However, this is still not good enough, as we cannot tell which block belongs to the
table and which block belongs to regular text. To get only unstructured text, we need
to first extract table contents and subtract table contexts from all texts.
Extracting table contents using PyMuPDF is relatively easy:
with pymupdf.open("sample_data/sample_data.pdf") as doc:
  for page in doc: 
    tables = page.find_tables()
    for i, table in enumerate(tables):
      print (f"Table {i+1}")
      print(table.extract(), end="\n\n")
32 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
The function find_tables() finds all tables in a given page. Each table can be
extracted using the extract() function that returns a table (Table 2-2 is our example)
as a 2D Python list, with rows as sublists.
Table 2-2. An example table to explain table-to-JSON serialization
Revision
Year
0.0.1
2025
For example, a table that looks like Table 2-2 will be extracted by the code above as
[
    ['Revision', 'Year'], 
    ['0.0.1', '2025']
]
With the table contents in hand, we can obtain non-table text by filtering all text with
table contents. The process is a bit more complicated, shown in the following code:
# Extract non-table text
def extract_unstructured_text(pdf_path):
    """
    Extract unstructured text from PDF, excluding table content.
    Returns clean paragraph text without tabular data.
    """
    unstructured_text = []
    
    with pymupdf.open(pdf_path) as doc:
        for page in doc:
            # Get all text from the page
            page_text = page.get_text()
            
            # Find tables on the page to exclude their content
            tables = page.find_tables()
            
            # Get table text blocks to filter out
            table_text_blocks = []
            if tables.tables:
                for table in tables:
                    # Get table bounding box
                    bbox = table.bbox
                    # Extract text within table bounds
                    table_text = page.get_text(clip=bbox)
                    table_text_blocks.append(table_text.strip())
            
            # Split page text into lines and filter out table content
            lines = page_text.split('\n')
            filtered_lines = []
            
            for line in lines:
                line = line.strip()
Document Parsing 
| 
33
                if line:  # Skip empty lines
                    # Check if this line is part of any table
                    is_table_content = False
                    for table_text in table_text_blocks:
                        if line in table_text:
                            is_table_content = True
                            break
                    
                    # Only include non-table content
                    if not is_table_content:
                        filtered_lines.append(line)
            
            # Join filtered lines back into paragraphs
            page_unstructured = '\n'.join(filtered_lines)
            if page_unstructured.strip():
                unstructured_text.append(page_unstructured)
    
    return '\n\n'.join(unstructured_text)
# Test the function
unstructured_content = extract_unstructured_text("sample_data/sample_data.pdf")
print("Unstructured text extracted:")
print(unstructured_content)
This time, we get what we expected:
Unstructured text extracted:
Sample doc for RAG Book Chapter 2
This is a great chapter
Finally, let’s take a look at how to extract images from a PDF file:
# Extract images 
with pymupdf.open("sample_data/sample_data.pdf") as doc:
 for page in doc:
   # Get images from the page
   image_list = page.get_images()
   for img_idx, img in enumerate(image_list):
     # Extract image data
     xref = img[0]
     base_image = doc.extract_image(xref)
     image_bytes = base_image["image"]
     # Display the image directly in Jupyter notebook
     display(Image(data=image_bytes))
     # Save image
     img_fmt = base_image["ext"]
     img_filename = f"img_{page.number}_{img_idx}.{img_fmt}"
     with open(image_filename, "wb") as img_file:
         img_file.write(image_bytes)
34 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
Extracting an image from a PDF file is a little bit complicated as images are consid‐
ered “external” information. The get_images() function does not actually get the
binary representations of images, but, instead, the “pointer” info of images. It is
the extract_image() function that actually gets the image data using the reference
number (xref) associated with the image. The code example above both displays the
image in a Jupyter notebook setting and saves it to a file in the native format of the
image contained in the PDF file.
Working with DOCX
Unlike the PDF, DOCX is a structured format that retains the metadata of elements in
a document. This makes it easier to extract text, tables, and images. A DOCX file is
essentially a ZIP archive (also called a ZIP ball) of XML files that store texts and tables
and media files, including images.
First, let’s extract the text and tables using python-docx, a library that is good at
handling texts and tables in DOCX-format files:
#!pip install python-docx
from docx import Document
from IPython.display import display, Image
document = Document('sample_data/sample_data.docx')
# extract text 
for para in document.paragraphs:
  print(para.text)
# extract tables
for table in document.tables:
  print("\n--- Table ---")
  for row in table.rows:
    row_text = [cell.text for cell in row.cells]
    print(row_text)
Then we can move on to extract images from DOCX files. As mentioned above, a
DOCX file is actually a ZIP archive containing XML files and media files. Those
media files can be accessed using the zipfile module. In the following code, we
will search for image files using their common suffixes/extensions: .jpg, .jpeg, .png,
and .gif:
import zipfile
zipf = zipfile.ZipFile('sample_data/sample_data.docx')
filelist = zipf.namelist()
for fname in filelist:
  _, ext = os.path.splitext(fname)
  if ext in ['.jpg', '.jpeg', '.png', '.gif']:
    # read image and display in Jupyter
Document Parsing 
| 
35
    with zipf.open(fname) as img_file:
        img_data = img_file.read()
        display(Image(data=img_data))
Now we have covered how to extract all three major modalities, texts, tables, and
images, from the DOCX format.
Parsing PDF files using an LLM
From the examples above, you might notice that parsing files can be quite complex.
For example, in the PyMuPDF example, we had to manually filter out table contents
from all text to get unstructured text. LLMs are powerful tools that can make this
process easier in many cases. Now let’s see how to use GPT-5.1 to parse a PDF file to
get unstructured text and tables, respectively, with just a few English instructions.
Set the environment variable OPENAI_API_KEY to your OpenAI API
key.
First, initiate an OpenAI client and load the PDF file:
from openai import OpenAI
client = OpenAI()
file = client.files.create(
    file=open("sample_data/sample_data.pdf", "rb"),
    purpose="user_data"
)
Then ask GPT-5.1 to extract the text, except those in tables and images:
completion = client.chat.completions.create(
    model="gpt-5.1",
    messages=[
        {
            "role": "user",
            "content": [
                {
                    "type": "file",
                    "file": {
                        "file_id": file.id,
                    }
                },
                {
                    "type": "text",
                    "text": """Extract the text content from the file. Exclude 
                    texts from tables or images.""",
                },
36 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
            ]
        }
    ]
)
print(completion.choices[0].message.content)
The message to GPT-5.1 has two parts: the first part is the file to be parsed, and the
second part contains the instructions. The instructions, in plain English, specify to
extract text content from the file while excluding texts from tables or images.
Next, let’s extract tables from the same PDF file:
completion = client.chat.completions.create(
    model="gpt-5.1",
    messages=[
        {
            "role": "user",
            "content": [
                {
                    "type": "file",
                    "file": {
                        "file_id": file.id,
                    }
                },
                {
                    "type": "text",
                    "text": """Extract the tables from the file. Return in 
                    Markdown tables.""",
                },
            ]
        }
    ]
)
print(completion.choices[0].message.content)
This snippet is similar to the previous one, except that the instruction now asks
GPT-5.1 to extract tables and return them in Markdown format.
In this section, we explored the fundamentals of how to prepare data for retrieval
and LLMs. We showed examples of extracting texts from PDF and DOCX files, two
of the most common document formats, using two popular libraries, PyMuPDF and
python-docx. Next, we will move on to the next step in the pipeline: text chunking.
Text Chunking
Chunking is the process of breaking down a big string of text, such as the full text of
a document, into smaller parts called “chunks.” For example, we might break a long
article into individual paragraphs or sections, or even into sentences.
Text Chunking 
| 
37
Why do we need chunking? The primary reason for chunking is the finite nature of
the LLM context window. Here are the context windows of the state-of-the-art LLMs
at the time of writing:
• OpenAI’s GPT-5.1: 400k
•
• Anthropic’s Claude Sonnet 4.5: 1M
•
• Google’s Gemini 3: 1M
•
The numbers may sound big, but they represent a deceptive abundance when applied
to enterprise-grade tasks. A normal person speaks about 120 words per minute.
Because an English word is about 1.3 tokens, a 400k context window is enough for
about 42 hours of continuous speech. That might sound like a lot, but if, for example,
you want to get a consensus of the market about a certain topic based on transcripts
of all relevant earnings calls, 42 hours is simply not enough.
Chunking helps to maximize the amount of relevant information that can be packed
into the context window. Through chunking, we can fill the context window with as
much relevant information as possible, allowing the LLM to generate a response with
a complete picture.
In the earning call example above, where the context window is not long enough to
accommodate all earnings call transcripts, if you only care about the growth of head
counts in top 10 players in an industry, then only the chunks related to that topic will
be included in the context window. Chunks about other topics, such as revenue or
technological breakthroughs, will be excluded.
Beyond the strict capacity constraints of the context window, there is a compelling
performance argument for chunking: computational overhead and inference latency.
Nvidia’s NIM LLMs benchmark examined the time to first token (TTFT) for different
context window lengths of Llama 3.3 70B using 2× H100 GPUs at FP8 precision.
Table 2-3 shows the result:
Table 2-3. Latency as a function of sequence length in Llama 3.3
Number of tokens Latency
200 tokens
31 ms
500 tokens
47 ms
1000 tokens
82 ms
5000 tokens
406 ms
10000 tokens
1833 ms
It is roughly estimated that the inference time of a transformer-based LLM scales
quadratically with the context length. It would be reasonable to project that when we
approach hundreds of thousands of tokens (if the GPU RAM can still support that
38 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
many tokens), the TTFT will lead to an unacceptably bad user experience. Also note
that the experiments above used 2x H100s, which are a very luxurious configuration.
At the time of writing, a single-H100 instance (p5.4xlarge) on AWS costs $6.88/hour
or $5,022/month on-demand. AWS does not offer duo-H100 configurations. Should
AWS offer it, the cost to achieve the latencies above is over $10k/month, nearly half of
an engineer’s base salary in Silicon Valley—quite pricey. Reducing the context length
by chunking can significantly reduce the inference latency and cost.
The second rationale for chunking is also related to the context window, but this
time it is the context window of embedding models. Embedding models are used to
convert text chunks into vectors for storage in a vector database and for fast, semantic
retrieval. However, their context windows are much smaller than those of LLMs.
As we will see in the section “Selection Criteria for Embedding Models” on page
45, state-of-the-art embedding models have a small context window. For example,
OpenAI’s third- and fourth-generation embedding models text-embedding-3-{small,
large} have a context window of 8k, as does Gemini’s second-generation embedding
model, gemini-embedding-002. So in the case of OpenAI and Google, we must limit
the chunk size to 8k tokens.
The third reason for chunking is to improve the response quality of RAG. The
improvement is at both the retrieval and generation stages. If a large chunk covers
multiple topics, the embedding vector of the large chunk reflects each of the topics
weakly. If we break the large chunk into smaller chunks, each smaller chunk will
focus on one topic and, thus, its embedding will better represent that topic. At the
retrieval stage, this means you get higher-relevance chunks, and at the generation
stage, smaller chunks mean less irrelevant information is presented to the LLM,
leading to more accurate responses. It is widely acknowledged that the reasoning
ability of LLMs degrades as the context length increases. For example, a plot from
Anthropic’s 1M context general availability announcement shows that LLMs from
three providers all degrade their retrieval abilities as the context increases. With
smaller chunks, the LLM can focus on the most relevant information without being
distracted by irrelevant details.
In summary, you can see why chunking is a necessary step for RAG. Let’s now see the
various chunking strategies common in RAG.
Chunking Strategies
Multiple chunking strategies have been proposed for RAG pipelines.
Fixed-size chunking is the most basic strategy, splitting documents into chunks of
a predefined size, typically measured in characters, words, or tokens. Its primary
limitation is that it disregards the natural structure of the text, potentially splitting
sentences or semantic units. A common mitigation is to introduce overlapping
Text Chunking 
| 
39
chunks, where tokens at the end of one chunk are repeated at the beginning of the
next, preserving local context across boundaries.
Content-aware chunking leverages linguistic and syntactic cues—such as sentence
boundaries and line breaks—to produce more coherent and contextually meaningful
segments. Several variants exist:
Sentence- or paragraph-based splitting
This approach segments text into paragraphs using line breaks (e.g., “\n\n”)
or into sentences using sentence boundary detection rules (e.g., punctuation).
Sentence segmentation is challenging due to numerous edge cases (e.g., abbrevia‐
tions where periods do not denote sentence boundaries). Specialized tools—com‐
monly referred to as sentencizers or sentence segmenters—are provided by natural
language processing (NLP) libraries such as spaCy, Stanza, and NLTK (Natural
Language Toolkit). Each resulting unit can serve as a chunk. If single-sentence
chunks are too granular, consecutive sentences may be merged, with optional
overlap between chunks to preserve context.
Recursive chunking
This approach uses a hierarchy of delimiters to progressively split text into
smaller units (e.g., paragraphs → sentences → clauses). A representative imple‐
mentation is LangChain’s RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter.
Document-structure chunking
This method extends recursive chunking by incorporating explicit document
structure, such as sections and subsections. For example, a Markdown document
can be segmented hierarchically based on heading levels (e.g., # → ## → ###),
preserving the logical organization of the content.
Semantic chunking
Semantic chunking further advances this paradigm by segmenting text based on
semantic similarity, for example by clustering sentences according to topic. This
approach produces chunks that are semantically coherent, rather than relying
solely on surface-level structure.
A comparison between the chunking strategies is given in Table 2-4.
Table 2-4. A comparison between chunking strategies
Method
Pros
Cons
Fixed-size
chunking
Simple to implement; predictable chunk size;
efficient for indexing and batching
Breaks semantic and syntactic structure; may split
sentences; requires overlap to preserve context (adds
redundancy)
Sentence/
paragraph-based
(content-aware)
Preserves linguistic structure; more coherent
chunks; easy to implement with NLP tools
Sentence boundary detection can be error-prone; chunk
sizes become uneven; may still miss higher-level context
40 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
Method
Pros
Cons
Recursive
chunking
Flexible; adapts to multiple levels of
structure; avoids overly large or small chunks
More complex to implement/tune; depends on delimiter
quality; may still ignore true semantics
Document-
structure
chunking
Aligns with logical document organization
(sections, headings); preserves hierarchical
context
Requires well-structured documents; less effective on
unstructured text; implementation depends on format
(e.g., Markdown, HTML)
Semantic
chunking
Produces semantically coherent chunks;
better retrieval quality; aligns with
embedding-based search
Computationally expensive; requires embeddings/
clustering; less predictable chunk size; harder to debug/
tune
How do we decide which chunking strategy to use? It’s hard to have one rule that
works best for all cases. A common practice is to evaluate based on your dataset.
Chroma offers an example that you can refer to when deciding which chunking
strategy to use.
Chunking effectiveness can be evaluated at either the retrieval or generation stage.
Retrieval is usually evaluated on retrieval benchmarks such as BEIR and in metrics
such as precision, recall, F1, nDCG (normalized discounted cumulative gain), and
MRR (mean reciprocal rank). Chapter 6 will discuss more about evaluation. Gener‐
ation is usually evaluated on benchmarks that involve finding answers from given
context/passages, such as those for question answering (QA) or machine reading
comprehension (MRC), and in metrics like BERTScore or LLM-based judgment.
Please note that the evaluation of LLM generation can be affected by the ranking of
chunks because LLMs tend to pay more attention to those at the beginning and the
end; this is known as the “lost in the middle” effect. So do not conclude that one
chunking strategy is better than another solely based on generation evaluation. Keep
in mind that the LLM generation can be impacted by many factors.
Somewhat surprisingly, you may find that all chunking strategies result in similar
performance and there is no one chunking strategy that gives you better performance
than all others. A recent work published at EMNLP (the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing) 2024 , “Is Semantic Chunking Worth the
Computational Cost?” by Renyi Qu and Forrest Bao (one of the authors of the book)
at Vectara and Ruixuan Tu at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, shows that fixed-
size chunking and semantic chunking make no difference on BEIR and RAGBench,
two industry-renowned benchmarks for evaluating the retrieval task. But readers
should not take our conclusion in this paper as definitive—existing benchmarks
were created in the pre-RAG time, and, thus, usually contain short passages, and the
impact of chunking may be more pronounced in longer texts. With more and more
modern, RAG-specific benchmarks that contain long passages, we may see different
conclusions in the future.
Text Chunking 
| 
41
Code Example: Chunking in Python
SpaCy is a popular preprocessing library for natural language processing tasks. Its
sentencizer splits text into sentences. The following code splits a long text (variable
text) into sentences (which are the chunks in this case), and iteratively prints them
out:
import spacy
# Load a pre-trained English model
nlp = spacy.load("en_core_web_sm")
text = """Mr. Wang is a teacher. He teaches A.I. (?). Does he love his work? 
Of course!"""
doc = nlp(text)
# Iterate over sentences
for sent in doc.sents:
  print(sent.text)
The output will be
Mr. Wang is a teacher.
He teaches A.I. (?).
Does he love his work?
Of course!
One advantage of using spaCy’s sentencizer over splitting sentences using punctua‐
tion is that it can better handle edge cases, such as abbreviations or titles that contain
periods. In our example above, the question mark in the middle of a sentence fails to
fool spaCy.
We can also use Python’s native string operations to create a fixed-length chunker.
# Fixed-length chunking with overlap
chunk_size = 30
chunk_overlap = 8
step_size = chunk_size - chunk_overlap
for i in range(0, len(text), step_size):
   chunk = text[i:i+chunk_size]
   print(chunk)
The output is
Mr. Wang is a teacher. He teac
 He teaches A.I. (?). Does he 
Does he love his work? Of cour
Of course!
In this extreme example, each chunk has a length of 30 characters and two consecu‐
tive chunks have an overlap of 8 characters. From the output, it is obvious that fixed-
length chunking breaks words, creating noise for embedding. However, if chunks are
42 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
long enough, the impact of such noises is small. In such a case, fixed-length chunking
is a good option for its speed.
Embedding Models
Imagine you want to find all the information about the United States from your
documents. An initial approach is to find all chunks that contain the words “United
States.” However, this approach can miss out chunks containing phrases like “the
U.S.” or “America,” which refer to the same entity but use different wording. A more
obvious example would be trying to find the word “two” with the number “2.”
The challenge we see in the paragraph above is due to a fundamental characteristic of
human languages: surface (dis)similarity is not aligned with semantic (dis)similarity.
The spelling of a word is the surface form of a concept. Two words of similar
surface forms, e.g., “hat” and “mat,” are not necessarily semantically similar or do
not necessarily refer to the same or similar concepts. The misalignment between
surface (dis)similarity and semantic (dis)similarity has long been a thorny problem of
artificial intelligence and, more specifically, natural language processing.
This is where embedding models come into play. They can help capture the semantic
meaning of phrases, allowing for more flexible and accurate retrieval of information.
In the example above, an embedding model could recognize that “the U.S.” and
“America” are related to “United States,” despite their different surface forms.
What Is (an) Embedding?
The process of embedding maps textual data (either a retrieved chunk or the query
from the user in the context of RAG) to a vector of floating point numbers, also known
as the embedding vector or simply the embedding. These vectors capture the semantic
meaning of the text, allowing for effective comparison and retrieval that simple key‐
word matching cannot achieve. Two semantically similar phrases (e.g., “Uncle Sam”
and “US Government”) will have a small distance between their embedding vectors
despite quite different spelling. The vector distance can be computed efficiently using
operations like the dot product, which today’s GPUs are optimized for.
Embedding solves a bottleneck that has troubled NLP for years: capturing the seman‐
tic similarity over surface dissimilarity (e.g., “Uncle Sam” versus “US Government”)
and the semantic dissimilarity over surface similarity (e.g., “cat” versus “hat”). If the
query contains “Uncle Sam” and we purely rely on the surface form of words, then we
will miss out chunks containing the phrase “US Government” and may even prefer
chunks that contain “Uncle Tom” or “Uncle Bob,” which are semantically irrelevant.
The purpose of embedding is to find a way to represent textual data such that
the similarity in representation aligns with the semantic similarity. Because such
embeddings are usually obtained by training a neural network, such representations
Embedding Models 
| 
43
2 Jeffrey L. Elman, “Finding Structure in Time,” Cognitive Science 14, no. 2 (1990): 179–211, https://doi.org/
10.1016/0364-0213(90)90002-E.
3 Tomas Mikolov, et al., “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their Compositionality,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26 (Proceedings of the NeurIPS, 2013).
4 Precisely speaking, it is not words being embedded but tokens. To more precisely capture the meanings,
modern approaches sometimes break words into subword tokens, e.g., “geopolitical” into “geo” and “political.”
are often called the dense representation and a retriever based on these embeddings is
sometimes referred to as a dense retriever.
Please do not let the example of “Uncle Sam” versus “US Govern‐
ment” give you the wrong impression that embedding is only for
matching synonyms, i.e., words of the same meaning. For example,
if the query is “Find all cases that happened in the US” and your
data source only mentions state names like California or Alberta
(which is a Canadian province), with the right embeddings, the
model could still retrieve cases in California while ignoring those
in Alberta.
Representing words as vectors has been a long-standing problem in natural language
processing. For example, what’s referred to as the Elman network2 was described in
the 1990s by Jeffrey L. Elman in “Finding Structure in Time,” which is an influential
work about recurrent neural networks (RNNs). The Elman network used one-hot
encoding to represent words. In one-hot encoding, each word is represented as a
vector of a length equal to the size of the vocabulary, with all elements set to zero
except for a single element corresponding to the word’s index in the vocabulary,
which is set to one.
The real breakthrough came with the advent of deep learning in the 2010s. In 2013,
Google researcher Tomas Mikolov introduced the Word2Vec3 model, which maps
a word to a vector through a simple task of predicting surrounding words given a
target word, known as theskip-gram model. For example, given the middle word
“pizza” in the sentence “I had pizza for lunch”, it predicts the words “I”, “had”, “for”,
and “lunch.”
The result was exciting. Famously, the vector difference between “queen” and
“woman” was shown to be nearly parallel to that between “king” and “man.”
Such embeddings are called “static embeddings”—“static” in the sense that every
word’s embedding is fixed after training. In 2018, the introduction of the BERT
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) model by Google further
advanced the field by enabling “contextualized embeddings” or “dynamic embed‐
dings,” which determine the embedding of a word4 based on its context.
44 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
5 This short course is with DeepLearning.AI and taught by one of the authors of this book.
This short course5 is a good resource to learn more about the internals of embedding
models, including the difference between word and sentence embeddings, and how to
build and train dual encoder models using contrastive loss.
Selection Criteria for Embedding Models
Like any machine learning model, the first trade-off you have to make when selecting
an embedding model is the model size and its performance. A larger model can
characterize the semantics better but may also be slower and require more memory.
You can find a balance by using a benchmark.
The Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB) is an industry benchmark for
evaluating the performance of embedding models. You can find rankings of embed‐
ding models at the MTEB Leaderboard.
Embedding dimensions are another important factor to consider when selecting
an embedding model. Higher-dimensional embeddings can capture more nuanced
semantic information, but they also require more computational resources. It’s essen‐
tial to find a balance between dimensionality and efficiency based on the specific use
case.
Many embedding models, such as OpenAI’s embedders and Google Gemini’s embed‐
ders, allow you to adjust the dimensionality of the embeddings by simply truncating
the embedding vector to any dimension. This is achieved during the training pro‐
cess of the embedder using a technique called Matryoshka Representation Learning
(MRL) that pushes the most discriminative semantic information to the lower dimen‐
sions by designing the loss function as the sum of losses of the embedding at different
dimensions. While MRL allows for truncation at any point, it is standard practice to
utilize power-of-two subdimensions (such as 1/8, 1/4, or 1/2 of the full vector). This
is because the model is usually optimized at these specific dimensional granularities
during the training process.
Like LLMs, which have context windows, embedding models also have limitations
on the input size they can handle. The context window of representative embedding
models, at the time of writing, is as follows (in terms of number of tokens):
• Alibaba’s Qwen3-Embedding-{0.6B, 4B, 8B}: 32k
•
• OpenAI’s third generation, text-embedding-3-{small, large}: 8k
•
• Google Gemini’s second generation, gemini-embedding-002: 8k
•
• Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)’s BGE-M3: 1k
•
Embedding Models 
| 
45
Practical Tips and Considerations
Be sure that your chunking strategy matches the embedding model’s context window
length. If your chunks are longer than the model’s context window, most serving
frameworks, such as HuggingFace’s Transformers library, will silently truncate the
chunks, causing information loss and degraded retrieval.
Also, be sure that your embedding dimensions meet the requirements of your vector
DB (to be discussed in this chapter, in “Vector Databases” on page 51). For example,
pgvector caps the dimension for 32-bit, full-precision floatpoint embeddings at 2,000.
To save storage and computation, a common practice is to lower the precision of your
embeddings, e.g., to 16-bit floats or even 8-bit integers. Many serving frameworks or
software-as-a service (SaaS) endpoints allow you to specify the precision you want for
the returning embeddings.
Embedding endpoints typically return vectors in JSON format, which is notoriously
inefficient for numerical data. A single 8-bit integer like “123” requires only 1
byte in binary but consumes 3 bytes as a JSON string. Furthermore, transmitting
floats via JSON risks precision loss during string serialization. To solve this, many
platforms support Base64 encoding; while this preserves full floating-point precision
and reduces payload size, it requires a decoding step on the client side to restore the
original float array.
Code Example: Generating Embeddings with Sentence Transformers
Sentence Transformers is an architecture for producing effective sentence embed‐
dings, and its Python package sentence-transformers provides many pre-trained
embedding models. Let’s use it to demonstrate how embeddings work.
First, let’s import the libraries and initialize the model:
from sentence-transformers import SentenceTransformer
import random 
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Load the pre-trained Sentence Transformers model
model = SentenceTransformer('all-MiniLM-L6-v2')
Then, let’s embed some sample sentences:
# List of sentences to encode
sentences = [
    "I am a happy person.",
    "I am a joyful person.",
    "I am a pessimistic person.",
    "I am not an optimistic person."
]
46 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
# Generate embeddings for the sentences
embeddings = model.encode(sentences)
We can take a sneak peek at the embeddings.
print (embeddings.shape)
print (embeddings[:, :5]) # only the first 5 dimensions due to space constraints
The first print() shall output (4, 384), indicating that we have four sentences,
each with 384-dimensional embeddings. The second print() will show the first five
dimensions of each embedding like this:
[[ 0.0046472   0.06651063  0.01479136 -0.02955691 -0.03556161]
 [ 0.03454593  0.05649192  0.00730661 -0.07299504 -0.06663913]
 [ 0.0615203   0.05317358  0.01788338  0.0348283  -0.03031245]
 [ 0.02471697  0.02527617 -0.00175561  0.02087232 -0.03713483]]
Now we can compute the pairwise similarity between the sentence embeddings.
similarity_matrix = model.similarity(embeddings, embeddings)
print (similarity_matrix)
We see a 4 × 4 tensor as follows:
tensor([[1.0000, 0.8151, 0.3864, 0.5210],
        [0.8151, 1.0000, 0.3383, 0.4128],
        [0.3864, 0.3383, 1.0000, 0.7047],
        [0.5210, 0.4128, 0.7047, 1.0000]])
Let’s visualize the matrix as a heatmap:
plt.figure(figsize=(5, 5))
plt.imshow(
    similarity_matrix, cmap='RdYlGn_r', interpolation='nearest', vmin=0, vmax=1
)
plt.title('Cosine similarity between any pair of embeddings')
plt.xlabel('Sentence ID')
plt.ylabel('Sentence ID')
plt.yticks([0, 1, 2, 3])
# Add text annotations
for i in range(len(similarity_matrix)):
    for j in range(len(similarity_matrix)):
        plt.text(j, i, f'{similarity_matrix[i][j]:.3f}', 
                ha='center', va='center', color='black')
plt.show()
The resulting heatmap is shown in Figure 2-3.
Embedding Models 
| 
47
Figure 2-3. Cosine similarity between embeddings of sentences used in the coding exam‐
ple above
The diagonal elements represent the similarity of each sentence with itself, which
is always 1. The first row represents the similarity of the first sentence with all
sentences. Its similarity with the second sentence is 0.8151, which is quite high,
indicating that the two sentences are semantically similar. Its similarity with the third
and fourth sentences are 0.3864 and 0.5210, respectively, indicating lower semantic
similarity. Moving our attention to the last two rows of the similarity tensor, we can
see that the third sentence is most similar to the fourth sentence, with a similarity
score of 0.7047, while its similarity with the first and second sentences are 0.3864 and
0.3383, respectively, which is quite low.
Now, let’s do an interesting experiment. What if we randomly take a slice of the
embeddings and compute their similarities? Here is the code:
# generate two random integers between 0 and 384
rand1 = random.randint(0, 384)
rand2 = random.randint(0, 384)
if rand1 > rand2:
    rand1, rand2 = rand2, rand1
print (f"Using semantic dimensions {rand1} to {rand2}")
similarity_matrix = model.similarity(
    embeddings[:, rand1:rand2], embeddings[:, rand1:rand2]
48 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
)
print (similarity_matrix)
At one run, you’ll see this output:
Using semantic dimensions 67 to 158
tensor([[1.0000, 0.8511, 0.3949, 0.5848],
        [0.8511, 1.0000, 0.3353, 0.4720],
        [0.3949, 0.3353, 1.0000, 0.6721],
        [0.5848, 0.4720, 0.6721, 1.0000]])
By using the embeddings between semantic dimensions 67 and 158, we can see that
the similarity matrix exhibits a similar pattern to the one obtained using the full
embeddings: that is, sentences 1 and 2 are still the most similar, followed by sentences
3 and 4.
If you repeat the process with different random dimensions, you will likely observe
similar patterns in the similarity matrices. This indicates today’s embedding models
are so good that even a randomly selected subspace of the embedding space can still
capture meaningful semantic relationships.
Vector Databases and Vector Search
Converting text into embeddings is only the first step toward the effective retrieval
of information. The next step is to store these embeddings in a way that allows quick
similarity lookups. This is where vector databases come into play.
Understanding Vector-Based Similarity Search
In the previous section, we learned that the beauty of embedding is that the vector
difference between two embeddings reflects the semantic similarity between the two
pieces of text that the embeddings represent. A common approach to measure vector
similarity is the dot product. The higher the dot product, the more semantically
similar the two vectors and their corresponding texts are. Note that when using
dot products to compare semantic similarities, we can remove the influence of vec‐
tor magnitude to purely consider the angular difference between two embeddings.
Hence, the embeddings need to be normalized, i.e., the magnitude is 1. When vectors
are normalized, their dot product equals another concept, called cosine similarity.
Given the embedding of a query, a naive but brute-force approach to find chunks
that are most relevant to the query would be to compute the dot product between
the query embedding and all other embedding vectors in the database. Thus, the
complexity is O(n), where n is the number of vectors in the database.
When your data is small, the brute force approach can work fine. Your setup can be as
simple as storing all pre-ingested vectors in the RAM. But, for a large-scale production
deployment of millions or even billions of chunks, we need some approach smarter
Vector Databases and Vector Search 
| 
49
6 Yu A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin, “Efficient and Robust Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search Using
Hierarchical Navigable Small World Graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
42, no. 4 (April 2020): 824–836, https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473.
than brute force. The good news is that we do not need to compute the dot products
with all vectors in the database, if we are willing to tolerate small errors. This is the idea
of approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search. In contrast, the brute force approach is
also sometimes called exact nearest neighbors (ENN) or FlatIndex search.
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Algorithms
To speed up the vector search, nearly all vector databases or vector search plug-ins in
traditional relational database management systems (RDBMSs) or NoSQL databases
offer some form of ANN algorithm. The word “approximate” in ANN means that the
algorithm does not guarantee to find the exact nearest neighbor, but rather a close
enough one.
The most prominent ANN algorithm is called Hierarchical Navigable Small World
(HNSW).
6 HNSW builds a multi-layer structure in which each vector is connected to
nearby vectors within the same layer. Upper layers contain a small number of vectors
and represent coarse views of the dataset, while lower layers contain more vectors and
enable finer detail. Querying begins at the top and moves downward, always trying to
reach vectors that are closer to the query at each level.
If you are interested in the algorithmic details of HNSW, you can read the original
paper, or read this HNSW tutorial with code implementation that can visualize the
construction of and search on an HNSW network.
To make this intuitive, imagine trying to find the nearest US city to a given coor‐
dinate that is in Los Altos, California. The brute-force approach would calculate
distances to every city in the country. HNSW instead proceeds in layers. At the top
level—Tier 1—we evaluate the query against only two major landmark cities:
• Los Angeles
•
• New York City
•
Whichever is closer gives us a strong hint about where to search next. Suppose the
query is closer to Los Angeles. We then move to Tier 2 and compare the query against
several large cities in the western United States:
• Los Angeles itself
•
• San Francisco
•
• Seattle
•
• Denver
•
50 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
If San Francisco turns out to be closest, we zoom into Northern California. We then
descend into Tier 3 and compare only cities within the Bay Area:
• San Francisco itself
•
• Oakland
•
• San Jose
•
Suppose San Jose is the nearest at this level. We move further down to Tier 4, now
evaluating individual South Bay cities such as the following:
• Palo Alto
•
• Mountain View
•
• Sunnyvale
•
• San Jose itself
•
By the time we reach this lowest level, the candidate cities are extremely local, and
we have located the nearest match by computing distances for only a handful of
cities at each step rather than every city in the country. This progressively refined
search—coarse first, fine later—is what makes HNSW so efficient in practice.
To see an illustration of the HNSW, check out the first figure in the original HNSW
paper.
Because HNSW navigates greedily through the graph, it is still possible—though rare
—for the search to be pulled into the “wrong” region if the starting decision happens
to be slightly off, such as when the query lies right on the boundary between two
major metropolitan areas. In such cases, HNSW may return a city that is extremely
close to the true nearest city, but not the absolute mathematically closest one. This is
the essence of the “approximate” in ANN.
In exchange, HNSW delivers superb performance: it examines only a tiny fraction
of the dataset while achieving accuracy that is, in most practical applications, nearly
identical to exact search—but at a fraction of the computational cost.
A famous open source library that implements the HNSW algorithm is Meta/Face‐
book’s Facebook AI Similarity Search (FAISS) library. FAISS provides a highly opti‐
mized implementation of HNSW and other ANN algorithms, making it easier for
developers to integrate ANN search capabilities into their applications.
Vector Databases
A vector database is a system built to manage, store, and query high-dimensional
embeddings, and primarily implement a scalable form of ANN. However, vector
databases go beyond just searching for similar vectors, and handle broader database
concerns: persistence, updates, deletes, metadata management, filtering, scalability,
and integration with other systems.
Historically, specialized vector databases emerged before mainstream databases
offered strong vector indexing; today, many general-purpose databases also support
Vector Databases and Vector Search 
| 
51
vector search. For example, pgvector for PostgreSQL, sqlite-vec for SQLite, and Atlas
Vector Search for MongoDB. So today, we cannot simply consider vector DBs as
only performing vector search while traditional RDBMSs or NoSQL databases only
perform nonvector search.
Many vector DB systems, such as the proprietary Pinecone and open source Mil‐
vus, Weaviate, and Qdrant, support metadata filtering, which is not performed on
embeddings but on metadata associated with the embeddings, such as document
IDs, timestamps, or other attributes. Metadata is just fields (similar to columns in
a traditional RDBMS or NoSQL database), and, thus, metadata filtering performs a
similar operation to traditional database filtering.
Although metadata filtering is not performed on the vector embeddings themselves,
it can have an impact on the speed and quality of vector search. For example, suppose
you have the quarterly financial reports for all public companies over decades. If you
want to ask questions about a specific company in a specific period of time, it’s better
for the DB system to first narrow down the search space by filtering the data by both
the company name and the time period before performing the vector search, which is
far more expensive and slower than traditional filtering.
The metadata filtering can be done before, in parallel with, and after the vector
search. The example we described above is pre-filtering. There’s a good blog post
from Pinecone that explains pre-filtering and post-filtering. Algorithms to jointly
perform metadata filtering and vector search include ACORN.
Parameters to Consider When Using Vector Search
A key parameter in vector search within a RAG pipeline is the number of results to
return, commonly denoted as k. The value of k cannot be too small nor too large: if
k is too small, the real answer to the user query may be missed due to being ranked
beyond k. If k is too large, we may face many issues: first, we may exceed the context
window length of the LLM; then, we may introduce noise and irrelevant information
to degrade the generation quality; and finally, we may unnecessarily increase the cost
and latency of the generation step.
Earlier we mentioned Matryoshka Representation Learning, which gives users the
flexibility to choose arbitrary embedding dimensions. The reduced dimension will
reduce the size of the vector database and speed up the vector search. However,
reducing the dimension too much may degrade the quality of the vector search. The
balance point depends on the specific use case and the embedding model used. Be
mindful of the maximal embedding dimensions that your vector DB can support. For
example, pgvector supports up to 2,000 dimensions for 32-bit, full-precision floats.
52 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
Code Example: Storing and Retrieving Vectors Using pgvector
Pgvector is an extension that adds vector search support to PostgreSQL. Here we
show some key steps to using pgector. For the complete executable code, please refer
to the Jupyter notebook pgvector-simple.ipynb in the GitHub repo of this book.
First, let’s embed some sentences using Sentence Transformers:
from typing import List
from sentence-transformers import SentenceTransformer
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import cosine_similarity
model = SentenceTransformer('all-MiniLM-L6-v2')
sample_sentences = [
    "I am a happy person.",
    "I am a joyful person.",
    "I am a pessimistic person.",
    "I am not an optimistic person."
]
embeddings = model.encode(sample_sentences)
The embeddings are 2D NumPy ndarrays, where each row corresponds to the
embedding of a sentence and each column corresponds to an embedding dimension.
Then, let’s create a table called sentence_embeddings with two columns: sentence
and embedding:
import psycopg2
import numpy as np
# Connect to a PostgreSQL database
conn = psycopg2.connect(
    host="YOUR_HOST", port="YOUR_PORT",
    database="YOUR_DB", user="YOUR USER"
)
conn.autocommit = True
cursor = conn.cursor()
# Enable pgvector extension
cursor.execute("CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS vector;")
# Create a table to store sentences and their embeddings
cursor.execute("""
    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS sentence_embeddings (
        sentence TEXT,
        embedding VECTOR(384)
    )
    """)
# Create HNSW index in the table "sentence_embeddings" for efficient 
similarity search
cursor.execute("""
    CREATE INDEX 
    ON sentence_embeddings 
    USING hnsw (embedding vector_l2_ops) 
Vector Databases and Vector Search 
| 
53
    WITH (m = 16, ef_construction = 64);
""")
The autocommit setting above saves the hassle of manually committing SQL com‐
mands to the database. When creating the column embedding for storing vectors,
we specified its dimension to be 384. This is because the embedding dimension of
all-MiniLM-L6-v2 is 384. At the end of the code snippet above, we create an index
in our table sentence_embeddings called hnsw that facilitates efficient search on this
table.
With the table sentence_embeddings ready, we can insert the precomputed embed‐
dings into it. We will do it one embedding at a time using the SQL INSERT statement.
Note that the variable embeddings we obtained earlier are 2D NumPy ndarrays.
When inserting into a PostgreSQL (PG) table, each row needs to be converted into
a list of floats and then serialized into a string for properly forming an INSERT
statement as a string:
# Insert sample sentences and their embeddings into the table 
"sentence_embeddings" for sentence, embedding in zip(sentences, embeddings):
    embedding_as_list: List[float] = embedding.tolist()
    cursor.execute(
        "INSERT INTO sentence_embeddings (text, embedding) "
        "VALUES (%s, %s::vector)",
        (sentence, embedding_as_list)
    )
Let’s take a sneak peek at the table:
# Take a sneak peek at the table contents
cursor.execute("SELECT text, embedding FROM sentence_embeddings;")
rows = cursor.fetchall()
for row in rows:
    print(row[0], row[1][:3])
If you see this truncated output, then you are in a good shape:
I am a happy person. [0.00465,0.06651,0.01479]
I am a joyful person. [0.03455,0.05649,0.00731]
I am a pessimistic person. [0.06152,0.05317,0.01788]
I am not an optimistic person. [0.02472,0.02528,-0.00176]
Finally, let’s run the vector search. To allow searching again and again, we create a
function:
def vector_search(query, model, top_k):
    query_embedding = model.encode([query])[0]
    query_embedding_as_list: List[float] = query_embedding.tolist()
    cursor.execute(
            """
            SELECT text, 
                    1 - (embedding <=> %s::vector) as similarity
            FROM sentence_embeddings
54 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
            WHERE embedding IS NOT NULL
            ORDER BY embedding <=> %s::vector
            LIMIT %s;
            """,
            (query_embedding_as_list, query_embedding_as_list, top_k)
        )
    results = cursor.fetchall()
    for row in results:
        print(row)
The special notation ::vector tells PG to treat the field embedding as vectors. The
operation <=> performs cosine similarity search—and since sentence-transformers
yields normalized vectors, cosine similarity equals the dot product here. In the SQL
SELECT statement above, embedding refers to the column embedding in the table
sentence_embeddings.
You may wonder why we use 1 - (embedding <=> %s::vector) as similarity. This
is because in pgvector, the operation <=> actually measures the dissimilarity between
two vectors. Hence, we have to use its complement to measure similarity.
Finally, let’s put vector search into spin!
query = "I am a smiling person."
vector_search(query, model, 3)
The print-out should be
('I am a happy person.', 0.7639919010393534)
('I am a joyful person.', 0.6934391466808068)
('I am not an optimistic person.', 0.3835604305136333)
As expected, there is a sharp drop in the similarity score from “happy” and “joyful” to
“not an optimistic person”, meaning that “a happy person” and “a joyful person” share
much higher semantic similarities with “a smiling person” than “not an optimistic
person” does.
Let’s try a different query:
query = "I have a bad feeling about the future."
vector_search(query, model, 3)
The result follows… makes sense, right?
('I am a pessimistic person.', 0.5613031721891864)
('I am not an optimistic person.', 0.5059882553216297)
('I am a happy person.', 0.3224700977626531)
Generative LLMs
We are now at the final step of the RAG stack: feeding the retrieved text chunks and
the original user query into an LLM to generate a response.
Generative LLMs 
| 
55
This step is a text-to-text transform. Although in the previous vector search step
we operate on numerical embedding vectors, we do not send the embeddings to the
LLM. Instead, as shown previously in Figure 2-2, we send a full LLM prompt, which
includes instructions and the original text chunks that correspond to the retrieved
embeddings to the LLM, and the LLM responds with a textual response.
LLMs
LLMs are vital to RAG because of their ability to generate human-like text after
analyzing and reasoning over the context. In RAG, the two most common tasks
for LLMs are summarization—getting a coherent but concise rewriting of chunks
retrieved, and question answering—generating an answer to the user query based on
chunks retrieved. LLMs are a good tool for those purposes in that LLMs are trained
to generate output text that is relevant to the input text according to a wide range of
user intents. Summarization and question answering happen to be two of the most
common user intents. A great amount of training data has been devoted to them, and
LLM vendors have invested a great deal of effort in these functions.
Using a neural network to produce output is called inference. Inference speed is
usually a bottleneck in using LLMs, especially when your RAG system runs on-prem
or in an air-gapped environment, and, thus, you must serve the LLM on your own.
Many techniques have been developed to improve the inference speed. For example:
• Quantization speeds up the LLM throughput by reducing the precision from
•
32-bit (float32) to 16-bit (e.g., using the float16 or bfloat16 representation), 8-bit
(int8), or even 4-bit (int4).
• FlashAttention is a popular method to accelerate inference of transformer-based
•
LLMs by making the memory usage more efficient when computing attention
values.
• Open source serving frameworks like vLLM and Ollama accelerate LLM
•
inference and reduce hardware footprints by implementing a combination of
methods.
What a beauty to see human ingenuity applied to squeezing out more performance
from existing hardware!
When picking LLMs, there is a trade-off between speed and quality. Generally, a
larger LLM has more capacities than a smaller LLM and can produce better results on
complex tasks. But quite often, the task is simple enough that a larger LLM performs
only marginally better or is on par with a smaller LLM. In such a case, the latency and
cost introduced by the larger LLM are hard to justify. It is worth the effort to create
an evaluation set of data (see more in the section “Evaluating LLMs and Prompt
56 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
Templates” on page 58 about the evaluation of LLM outputs) to find the sweet-spot
LLM that satisfies your expectation at the minimal cost.
Another factor to consider when picking LLMs is data privacy. Many RAG use cases
require on-premises or air-gapped deployment, meaning that the data cannot go to
the public Internet. In such cases, using proprietary LLMs, such as OpenAI’s GPT
series or Anthropic’s Claude models, via public HTTP endpoints, is not allowed, and
to most developers, open source LLMs are the only option. At the time of writing,
the gap between open source and proprietary LLMs on common RAG tasks, such as
summarization and question answering, is small enough, and the rule of thumb is
that an open source LLM with more than 70B parameters is decent enough.
RAG Prompt Engineering
LLMs have a great power called instruction following. This means that they can be
guided to perform specific tasks based on the instructions provided in the prompt.
Prompt engineering is the practice of designing and refining these prompts to elicit
the desired responses from the model.
In the context of RAG, the retrieved results and the user query need to be assembled
properly to guide the LLM in generating a relevant response. There is no absolute
best way to do this, as it may depend on the specific use case and the LLM being used.
Here, we just provide some examples to inspire our readers in developing prompt
templates.
Here is a straightforward prompt template:
You are a helpful information-processing assistant. Extract answers related to a 
search query based on the context provided.
Here is the context: {retrieved_results}
Here is the search query: {query}
Remember earlier in the section “The Query Flow” on page 26, we mentioned rewrit‐
ing the original user query to a retrieval query? Since now we are at the generation
step, we can use the original user query here. This will help the LLM to generate a
response that is more aligned with the user’s intent.
However, most LLMs can perform better if the query is placed ahead of the context,
due to their training data. Hence, a template like the following may be preferred:
You are a helpful information-processing assistant. Extract answers related to a 
search query based on the context provided.
Here is the search query: {query: str}
Here is the context: {retrieved_results: list[str]}
Generative LLMs 
| 
57
A modern LLM has the ability to perform complex reasoning to guide itself in
reaching better answers. So you may want to add such instructions in the prompt
to help the model leverage its reasoning capabilities. For example, you could add a
simple chain-of-thought (CoT) instruction into the prompt:
If the answer is not obviously present in the context, please think step by step 
and provide a detailed explanation of your reasoning process.
Because hallucination is a big concern, you may explicitly tell an LLM to adhere to
the information in the context by adding an instruction like this into the prompt
template:
If an answer cannot be reasonably inferred from the context, please simply say 
"I don't know." If you used any assumptions to arrive at your answer, please 
clearly state what assumptions are made.
So far, our prompt templates are very generic or task-agnostic. If you know the nature
of the queries that users will ask, you can tailor the prompts to be more specific
and effective. For example, if you know the task is question answering, your prompt
template may be simplified:
Answer the question {query: str}, 
given the context {retrieved_results: list[str]}
As another example, if you know that the user query is not a formal question but
more like a search query to Google, then your prompt template can be tailored for
summarization:
You are a good summarizer. Please summarize the information about {query: str} 
from the context below:
 {retrieved_results: list[str]}. 
Providing background information can potentially improve the LLM’s output. For
example, if you know the domain of your RAG application is science or sports,
you can begin your prompt by stating something like “you are an expert in science/
sports.”
The last piece of advice is that a common practice to help an LLM understand
different parts in a prompt is to use XML tags to delineate them. For example, like
this:
You are a helpful information-processing assistant. Extract answers related to a 
search query based on the context provided.
<query>{query: str}</query>
<context>{retrieved_results: list[str]}</context>
Evaluating LLMs and Prompt Templates
There are many LLMs on the market, and there are many ways to prompt them.
A natural question to ask is this: how to pick the right LLM and a corresponding
58 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
prompt template? Without going into the rabbit hole of RAG evaluation (which we
discuss at some detail in Chapter 6), here, we briefly discuss some key steps.
The first step is preparing evaluation queries that reflect or mimic the types of queries
that users might send to the RAG system.
If you have a large number of existing user queries, fantastic. Otherwise, synthesize
the queries by prompting an LLM with your knowledge of the data, user behavior,
and other information about the potential RAG system.
The next step is to build “critics” for evaluating the responses from RAG. A common
practice is called LLM-as-a-judge. Once again, we leverage the instruction-following
capability of LLMs to configure them into evaluators that judge different aspects of
the responses. There are usually two common aspects:
• Relevance—does the response answer the query?
•
• Faithfulness—is the response well-supported by the retrieved documents?
•
Note that we can use the same LLM for both generation and evaluation. Thanks
to LLMs’ instruction-following capability, one LLM can be configured to perform
different tasks.
LLM-as-a-judge has several drawbacks. First, it may be slow and expensive because it
uses expensive LLMs. Second, it may not always be accurate. LLMs can hallucinate,
e.g., the reasoning from one step to another may be flawed, so the LLM’s judgment
may be flawed, too. Third, it may not be consistent. The same LLM may give different
judgments at different times.
An alternative to LLM-as-a-judge is dedicated natural language generation (NLG)
evaluation models, which are generally much smaller than LLMs. Fine-tuned to eval‐
uate specific aspects of LLM generation, these models are much faster, cheaper, and
more robust than LLM-as-a-judge. For example, Vectara’s HHEM, whose co-authors
include authors of this book, is a time-tested model to judge faithfulness. It was
downloaded more than 5 million times between August 2024 (when it debuted) and
August 2025. Galileo’s Luna is another hallucination-judging model.
The last, but golden, form of evaluation is human evaluation. Human evaluators can
provide the most accurate and nuanced assessments of LLM responses, taking into
account context, intent, and subtlety that automated systems may miss. However,
human evaluation is also the most resource-intensive and time-consuming method.
It is often used as a final, small-scale check after automated evaluations have been
performed.
To evaluate LLMs and prompt templates, simply send the evaluation queries to the
RAG system and collect the responses. Then, use the established critics to assess
the quality of the responses. If your evaluation criteria are multifaceted, consider
Generative LLMs 
| 
59
using a weighted scoring system to account for different aspects of response quality.
Finally, just pick the combination of LLM and prompt template that yields the best
performance according to your evaluation criteria.
Code Example: Using Anthropic Claude to Generate Responses in RAG
The Jupyter notebook generative_LLMs.ipynb provides a straightforward demo of
using LLMs and prompt templates to generate responses based on user queries and
context.
We use the actual text of the section “Evaluating LLMs and Prompt Templates” on
page 58 as the context, and present three queries to Anthropic’s Claude Sonnet 4.5:
1. “If I don’t care about budget or time, what’s the most accurate way to judge the
1.
RAG system?”
2. “What are the common aspects that people judge the RAG system on?”
2.
3. “How many ways are there to evaluate the RAG system? Just method names.”
3.
The prompt template is similar to those we went over in “RAG Prompt Engineering”
on page 57:
You are a good reader. Answer the query based on the context provided. Give me a 
short answer. 
Query: {query}
Context: {context}
Given a query and context, we make the request to Anthropic’s Claude Sonnet 4.5
via its Python API:
import anthropic
response = anthropic.Anthropic().messages.create(
    model="claude-sonnet-4-5",
    messages=[
        {"role": "user", 
        "content": prompt_template.format(query=query, context=context)}
    ]
)
print (response.content[0].text)
For the first query, the response is
**Human evaluation** is the most accurate way to judge a RAG system when budget 
and time aren't constraints. The context explicitly states that "human 
evaluators can provide the most accurate and nuanced assessments of LLM 
responses, taking into account context, intent, and subtlety that automated 
systems may miss" and describes it as the "golden evaluation."
60 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
For the second query, the response is
Based on the context, people commonly judge RAG systems on two main aspects:
    1. **Relevance** - whether the response actually answers the query
    2. **Faithfulness** - whether the response is well supported by the 
       retrieved documents
These evaluations can be performed using LLM-as-a-judge, dedicated NLG 
evaluation models, or human evaluation.
For the third query, the response is
Based on the context, there are **3 ways** to evaluate RAG systems:
     1. **LLM-as-a-judge**
     2. **NLG evaluation models**
     3. **Human evaluation**
In all three test queries, the responses provided by Anthropic’s Claude Sonnet 4.5 are
both relevant and faithful to the context. It shows that our simple prompt template is
effective.
Conclusion
This chapter unpacked the foundational elements that make a RAG system work in
practice. From parsing messy, real-world documents to chunking them for efficiency;
from converting text into meaningful embeddings to storing those embeddings in
vector databases; from performing fast approximate search to prompting an LLM
to reason over retrieved evidence—we explored how these steps form a coherent
pipeline that turns static data into dynamic, query-driven intelligence.
However, as we move from theory to implementation, several critical realities emerge:
The ingestion bottleneck
Errors introduced during ingestion—such as poor OCR or lost formatting—
propagate downstream and cannot be reliably corrected during retrieval or gen‐
eration.
The nuance of chunking
Default or naive chunking strategies are rarely sufficient for production; they
must be validated through rigorous retrieval evaluation to ensure context is
preserved.
Retrieval limitations
Even with high-quality embeddings, retrieval can fail due to redundancy, noise,
or scope mismatch. This motivates the need for hybrid search and filtered
retrieval methods, which we will explore in Chapter 3.
Conclusion 
| 
61
Although each layer may seem modular, their interactions are where a RAG system
truly succeeds or fails. Effective retrieval depends on thoughtful chunking. High-
quality generation depends on accurate retrieval. Index design affects latency and
cost. Embedding model choice influences relevance. No component operates in iso‐
lation, and improving a RAG system often requires examining these connections
end-to-end.
The concepts and code examples here serve as the essential toolkit for building
production-grade RAG applications. In the next chapter, we will build on this
foundation and explore how to enhance the base stack with advanced techniques:
hybrid search, reranking, and architectural upgrades that make RAG systems robust,
scalable, and capable of handling complex real-world workloads.
62 
| 
Chapter 2: The Base RAG Stack
CHAPTER 3
Scaling Your RAG Stack
In Chapter 2, you saw the basic components of a RAG stack: document parsing,
chunking, embedding models, and vector search, as well as using an LLM for the
final generation of the response to the user. With this knowledge, you should now be
able to build end-to-end RAG applications that work pretty well on small to medium
datasets, and experience for yourself how RAG works in practice.
In this chapter, we tackle more advanced techniques that help you bring your RAG
stack to enterprise scale, without sacrificing latency or response quality, including
data ingestion, advanced retrieval techniques, guardrails, and handling RAG hallu‐
cinations. Although not strictly part of scale, security and data privacy become
important as you scale in production, and we cover those in Chapter 4 under “Data
Security and Privacy”.
We end this chapter with a less commonly discussed but critical aspect of any RAG
application: building a great user experience to make sure your frontend is as good as
your backend.
RAG at Scale
When your RAG application grows in scale, things can become more complex
relatively quickly. You had to deal with higher volumes of documents and queries,
multiple document formats, integrating advanced retrieval mechanisms to maintain
high-quality responses, hallucination mitigation, guardrails, and a lot more.
In this section, we’ll dive into the various challenges that come up with RAG at scale
and how to address them.
63
