1 You might find the book Practical MLOps by Noah Gift and Alfredo Deza (O’Reilly) useful for a deep dive on
MLOps.
integration patterns that are simply too vast and environment-specific to capture
in this chapter.
Much of the “heavy lifting” required to move RAG into production involves standard,
rigorous software engineering and DevOps practices rather than RAG-specific logic.
Concepts such as high availability, load balancing, containerization (Docker/Kuber‐
netes), secrets management, and CI/CD pipelines are universal requirements for any
mission-critical enterprise application.1
Therefore, this chapter focuses primarily on system design, architecture, and strategy,
as well as how to transition from a POC to production.
Challenges with RAG in Production
A scalable, production-grade RAG stack is more difficult to construct than it first
appears. There are many hurdles, including response quality, latency, security, sup‐
port, and cost.
Response Quality and Reduced Hallucinations
Whether you are using RAG to build an AI assistant or an application for question
answering or automated RFP (request for proposal) responses, or any other use case,
the quality of the response from your RAG pipeline is often the most important
feature to focus on.
Users tend to disengage from an application they cannot trust, so if many of the
responses are inaccurate or include hallucinations, user trust in this application
dramatically reduces, rendering it essentially unusable.
It’s important to understand the various factors that may result in low-quality respon‐
ses, so that you can identify the cause and address it.
Reason 1: No relevant data
Imagine a RAG pipeline that is grounded in information from user manuals about
Samsung TVs. If the user asks a question about a specific Samsung TV model, but the
user manual for that model is not included in the data, then clearly the system has no
information to ground its response in.
Here’s another example: consider an investment bank building a RAG pipeline groun‐
ded in two specific datasets:
106 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
• All public Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings (like 10-Ks)
•
• The bank’s own internal research reports.
•
An analyst might ask a complex, comparative question, such as, “What is the primary
revenue-driver risk mentioned in our internal research for Nvidia, and how does it
compare to the risk profile of SambaNova Systems?”
The system is perfectly equipped to answer the first half of the query, as it has access
to the proprietary reports on Nvidia. However, SambaNova is a private entity (at
least at the time we are writing this book), and thus has no public filings, and if the
investment bank has never covered it internally, the RAG system’s knowledge base
contains zero relevant data about its risk profile.
In both examples, what often occurs is that the retrieval pipeline will come up with
some retrieved facts, but those will not be relevant, and the LLM will use those
irrelevant facts to generate a response anyway, which might be incorrect.
By tracking user queries and response quality, you can identify this kind of issue,
and update your RAG dataset to include all the necessary information to respond
accurately to any user query.
When you identify missing data, your instinct will be to simply rerun your ingestion
script to update the vector database. This is fine for a POC, but in production use,
appropriate care must be taken. A bug in your ingestion script (like broken character
encoding or malformed metadata) could “pollute” your live index, degrading results
for everyone. A typical pattern is a “staging verification workflow,” whereby you
maintain a separate “staging collection” (which can be a smaller subset or a full clone
of the production index). New data is first ingested into staging, then an automated
suite of retrieval unit tests queries the staging collection to verify that the new
documents are retrievable and formatted correctly. Only after these tests pass is the
data “promoted” and ingested into the live production index.
Beyond just finding missing files, this is where partnering with subject matter experts
(SMEs) is vital. In many cases, only a domain expert can determine whether a
document is truly the “source of truth” or an outdated version that should be purged
to ensure the RAG system doesn’t ground itself in obsolete information.
Reason 2: Weak retrieval pipeline
Assuming we do have the right information in the dataset, the next culprit is often the
quality of your retrieval pipeline. Most POCs start with a simple vector search (aka
semantic search) approach, using a vector database.
As you scale to production, the number of documents that are available grows,
making the task of accurate retrieval much more difficult since there are a lot more
potential matches for any given query, requiring more sophisticated filtering and
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
107
ranking mechanisms. Furthermore, as the dataset grows in size, the indexing used by
vector and keyword search mechanisms becomes larger and more complex, demand‐
ing efficient algorithms to update and search it quickly.
Often, you need additional capabilities, such as hybrid search or various types of
rerankers (as discussed in Chapter 3) to achieve a high-quality retrieval pipeline.
This often translates into distributed storage and requires mechanisms to ensure
consistency, fault tolerance, and efficient data retrieval, all of which add layers of
complexity.
The bottom line is this: RAG is “garbage-in-garbage-out.” If you don’t invest enough
in a strong retrieval pipeline as you scale to production, the facts provided to the
LLM will not be as accurate as in your POC, and the quality of responses will
degrade.
Reason 3: LLM hallucinations
Even with perfect retrieval, LLMs often struggle to faithfully incorporate the provided
evidence or facts in the source documents (or chunks) into the final response, result‐
ing in hallucinations.
One complicating factor is the variability and potential incompleteness of the
retrieved facts. In many cases, the documents returned by the retrieval component
may not cover the full scope of information required to answer the query, leading the
generative model to fill in gaps with inferred information. This gap-filling behavior
can inadvertently result in hallucinations, and detecting these inaccuracies is further
complicated by the fact that the generated text may be partially supported by the
retrieved data, creating a “spectrum of factuality” rather than a clear binary between
true and false.
As you consider your production RAG application, you need to choose an LLM
that has a low rate of hallucinations, as well as consider implementing advanced
techniques to detect and correct hallucinations in your RAG pipeline (as we discussed
in Chapter 3).
This adds significant additional research and development effort, well beyond what’s
required for a POC.
Reason 4: Prompt engineering
The basic prompt for RAG can appear quite simple, as you saw in Chapter 1. But
engineering a better prompt for your RAG system can have a significant positive
impact on the quality of responses.
For example, your basic prompt may be
prompt = """
Use the following pieces of context to answer the question at the end.
108 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
{context}
Question: {question}
Helpful Answer:"""
A common improved prompt may look like this:
prompt = """
Use the following pieces of context to answer the question at the end. If you 
don't know the answer, just say that you don't know; don't try to make up an 
answer. 
{context}
Question: {question}
Helpful Answer:"""
Providing specific instructions to the LLM, such as shown here in “If you don’t know
the answer, just say that you don’t know; don’t try to make up an answer,” can be a
powerful way to improve response quality, especially as your production RAG covers
a lot more documents and edge cases that a more basic prompt may not cover.
Careful prompt design is thus crucial for curbing low-quality responses, as well as
providing better defenses against prompt injection attacks, and requires significant
testing across a multitude of queries.
High Latency
Enterprise RAG systems must reconcile the computational load of semantic search,
hybrid search, reranking, generative LLMs, and any other component in your RAG
pipeline with user expectations of a quick response time.
A good goal for the retrieval components—semantic search, hybrid search, and
reranking—is no more than 300 ms on average, whereas for a generative LLM,
latency is often measured in the 2–3 seconds range for smaller models and up to even
5–10 seconds for the top frontier LLMs, with “reasoning” models going even higher.
If you include hallucination detection or correction, that can add additional latency.
During prototyping, it’s common to prioritize functionality over speed, and as you
move to a production deployment, the application needs to adhere to more stringent
latency thresholds comparable to those of the publicly available ChatGPT, often in the
range of a few seconds end-to-end.
The amount of data during the POC is usually a small fraction of the size of data in
production, and that growth in scale can easily result in much higher latency since all
the components are under a much higher load:
• The vector database has to be properly indexed to maintain low-latency
•
responses.
• The hybrid search must be optimized for handling more data without a signifi‐
•
cant increase in latency.
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
109
• The reranker may need to process more candidates.
•
• The number of chunks provided to the generative LLM may need to be higher to
•
maintain accuracy.
What’s more, you may find that you need to replace some components used during
the POC with different components in production to avoid higher latency. For exam‐
ple, the vector DB you used in the POC may have kept all data in memory, and, of
course, in production, that needs to scale up, and the vector database you chose may
not perform as well at that larger scale.
It’s important to mention that you need to not only keep the average latency within
acceptable bounds, but also control tail latencies (e.g., the 95th percentile) that can
degrade the overall user experience, especially under complex or resource-intensive
queries.
In order to mitigate high latency, you will need to consider a variety of techniques,
including parallelization and auto-scaling, using alternative LLMs, software or hard‐
ware acceleration, efficient data indexing, and caching.
Parallelization and auto-scaling
Parallelizing the end-to-end query flow with auto-scaling (so that your RAG pipeline
efficiently handles low or high query volume without significant impact to latency)
requires careful system design.
A common design pattern is a set of decoupled microservices, with a stateless
orchestrator service acting as the central “brain.” This orchestrator, a lightweight
CPU-bound API server, receives the user’s query and manages the end-to-end flow.
After first calling an embedding service, the orchestrator “fans out” multiple requests
simultaneously—for example, it queries the vector database and a keyword-based
lexical search service at the exact same time.
This parallel fan-out/gather pattern ensures the retrieval latency is dictated by the
slowest data source, not the sum of all of them. Once all candidate chunks are
gathered, the orchestrator sends them to a dedicated reranker service, and finally,
passes the optimized context to the LLM generation service.
This decoupled design is the key to auto-scaling: each service (the CPU-bound
orchestrator, the input/output (I/O)-bound vector DB, and the expensive GPU-
bound LLM service) is managed as its own group of replicas and can scale up or
down independently based on its specific resource bottleneck, such as CPU utiliza‐
tion, in-flight GPU requests, or database connections.
110 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
Using alternative LLMs
It is not uncommon to have the exact same LLM in production as you use in the
POC, especially if you want to maintain the same performance characteristics in
terms of response quality. However, if you used a frontier large-scale LLM in the
POC—perhaps since it was easy and available—you may find that you can benefit
from trying smaller/faster LLMs in production if latency is an issue and you need to
reduce it.
If you need to use a different LLM in production, this can, of course, have signifi‐
cant implications on response quality, so you need to test your RAG pipeline very
carefully, and perform RAG evaluation (see Chapter 6) to ensure that there is no
degradation in quality.
Software or hardware acceleration
Within a decoupled microservice architecture, you can dedicate specific hardware
and software optimizations to each pod to maximize its performance, assuming your
pipeline actually performs those functions and is not calling an external API service.
For example, your embedding, reranker, and LLM pods can see significant perfor‐
mance gains with powerful GPUs such as Nvidia A100s or H100s. More impor‐
tantly, you can serve any of these models using an optimized inference server like
vLLM, TensorRT-LLM, or Text Generation Inference (TGI). This software layer is
non-negotiable, as it implements critical techniques like continuous batching (to effi‐
ciently handle concurrent generation requests from your many parallel orchestrator
pods) and paged attention (to slash memory overhead for the long contexts typical in
RAG).
Efficient data indexing
If you use a locally hosted vector database, a prerequisite for low latency is to
implement an approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) index like HNSW (discussed in
Chapters 2 and 3) or Inverted File Product Quantization (IVFPQ).
Similarly, for your lexical search, implement proper sharding with your Elasticsearch
or OpenSearch indices and use appropriate text analyzers so that keyword lookups
are fast. A well-designed index is what allows your retrieval pods to respond in
milliseconds, making your orchestrator’s fan-out strategy viable.
Caching
Caching—implemented as a high-speed, in-memory key–value store (like Redis or
Dragonfly)—can sit “in front of” your various microservices, and help in reducing
overall latency. Caching can be implemented in the following components:
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
111
Full response cache 
The orchestrator first hashes the raw user query. If this key exists, it returns
the stored, final LLM-generated answer immediately, bypassing your entire RAG
pipeline. This is highly effective for common, identical questions.
Retrieval cache 
The orchestrator hashes the query embedding. It then checks if the results of the
retrieval step (i.e., the list of chunks) are cached. If so, it skips the entire retrieval
steps and just returns those results.
Chunk cache
After retrieving the chunk IDs, the orchestrator can check a cache for the actual
text content of those chunks, saving a call to a potentially slow document store
(like S3 or Postgres).
In a RAG application where the input is often a natural language query, it can be
beneficial to implement semantic caching, where a similarity search is performed
against stored cache keys rather than requiring an exact string match. Because end
users rarely phrase the same question identically twice (e.g., “How do I reset my
password?” versus “I need to change my password”), a traditional hash-based cache
often fails to register a hit. In a semantic cache, the incoming query is embedded into
a vector, and the system searches the cache for previous queries that are semantically
close (above a certain similarity threshold). If a match is found, the system returns
the cached response associated with that similar query, significantly increasing cache
hit rates for natural language inputs.
By strategically caching at these layers, you can bypass the most expensive parts of
your system. However, the central challenge is cache invalidation, which, if not handled
properly, may introduce incorrect responses, especially in environments where data is
changing rapidly. Rather than relying only on a simple time-to-live (TTL) mechanism,
a more robust solution is to have your data ingestion pipeline publish events (e.g., to a
Redis Pub/Sub channel or Kafka topic) whenever a document is added or updated. A
subscriber service can then actively purge any of the cache entries associated with that
document, ensuring your RAG system never serves stale data.
As always, robust and continuous monitoring helps identify latency bottlenecks in
real time as well as more systemic latency issues, and correct them.
Let’s demonstrate the idea of caching of retrieval with a simple example using Lang‐
Chain (full example code is available on GitHub). Here we use Redis (although
Dragonfly or KeyDB are good alternatives) for semantic caching.
import numpy as np
from langchain_core.documents import Document
class SemanticCachedRetriever(BaseRetriever):
    """
112 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
    A retriever that uses embedding similarity for semantic caching.
    Similar queries can hit the cache even if worded differently.
    """
    _base_retriever: any = PrivateAttr()
    _embeddings: any = PrivateAttr()
    _similarity_threshold: float = PrivateAttr(default=0.85)
    _cache_embeddings: List[np.ndarray] = PrivateAttr(default_factory=list)
    _cache_results: List[List[Document]] = PrivateAttr(default_factory=list)
    _cache_queries: List[str] = PrivateAttr(default_factory=list)
    
    def __init__(
        self, 
        base_retriever, 
        embeddings,
        similarity_threshold: float = 0.85,
        **kwargs
    ):
        super().__init__(**kwargs)
        self._base_retriever = base_retriever
        self._embeddings = embeddings
        self._similarity_threshold = similarity_threshold
        self._cache_embeddings = []
        self._cache_results = []
        self._cache_queries = []
    
    def _cosine_similarity(self, a: np.ndarray, b: np.ndarray) -> float:
        """Compute cosine similarity between two vectors."""
        return np.dot(a, b) / (np.linalg.norm(a) * np.linalg.norm(b))
    
    def _find_similar_cached(
        self, query_embedding: np.ndarray
    ) -> Optional[Tuple[List[Document], str, float]]:
        """Find cached results for a semantically similar query."""
        best_similarity = 0.0
        best_match = None
        best_query = None
        
        for i, cached_emb in enumerate(self._cache_embeddings):
            similarity = self._cosine_similarity(query_embedding, cached_emb)
            if similarity > best_similarity:
                best_similarity = similarity
                best_match = self._cache_results[i]
                best_query = self._cache_queries[i]
        
        if best_similarity >= self._similarity_threshold:
            return best_match, best_query, best_similarity
        return None
    
    def _get_relevant_documents(self, query: str) -> List[Document]:
        # Compute embedding for the query
        query_embedding = np.array(self._embeddings.embed_query(query))
        
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
113
        # Check for semantically similar cached query
        cache_hit = self._find_similar_cached(query_embedding)
        if cache_hit:
            docs, original_query, similarity = cache_hit
            print(f"Semantic Cache Hit! (similarity: {similarity:.3f})")
            print(f"  Matched query: \"{original_query}\"")
            return docs
        
        # Cache miss - perform retrieval
        print("Semantic Cache Miss. Performing vector search...")
        results = self._base_retriever.invoke(query)
        
        # Store in cache
        self._cache_embeddings.append(query_embedding)
        self._cache_results.append(results)
        self._cache_queries.append(query)
        
        return results
    
    def clear_cache(self):
        """Clear the semantic cache."""
        self._cache_embeddings = []
        self._cache_results = []
        self._cache_queries = []
As you can see, this works by leveraging semantic similarity: instead of hashing the
query, we convert it into a vector embedding and compare it against previously cached
query vectors using cosine similarity. If a past query is found to be sufficiently similar
(exceeding the defined threshold, which we chose to be 0.85), we return the stored
results immediately. If not, we proceed with the standard retrieval and store the new
query, its embedding, and the results in the local memory cache for future use.
However, while exact match or semantic caching is simple to implement in a POC,
caching becomes significantly more complex at production scale. You will need to
address three primary challenges:
Cache invalidation
When new documents are ingested or old ones updated, the cached retrieval
results based on the old data may become stale. Since you control ingestion, you
can use a trigger-based approach that invalidates any response that is based on
documents that are updated.
Eviction strategy 
As your cache grows, it will eventually consume all available RAM in the
machine. To address this, you can configure an eviction policy (typically least
recently used, or LRU) so the cache knows which old retrieved results to delete to
make room for new ones.
114 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
2 This is a brand name of acetaminophen, or paracetamol.
Horizontal scaling 
A single Redis instance may not be enough to handle the throughput or memory
requirements of an enterprise workload. In this case, you can utilize clustering
(sharding), where the data is automatically split across multiple machines based
on the hash of the key, allowing the cache to scale horizontally.
Redis LangCache is designed exactly for this purpose, and turnkey RAG platforms
often implement these strategies as part of their stack.
Data Security and Privacy
Production RAG deployments must implement defense-in-depth strategies across
three critical attack surfaces: ingestion layer, vector and lexical databases, and the
generation step. Let’s dig into each of these a bit more.
Ingestion layer security
Like any ETL (extract, transform, load) pipeline, your ingestion flow needs to use
standard encryption protocols to ensure safety during data movement from the data
sources to your RAG pipeline. Furthermore, your implementation needs to ensure
the same security protocols are implemented throughout your RAG pipeline and
in every component—document extraction, specialized table and image processing,
chunking, embedding, and storage in the vector database, lexical datastore, or even
graph database (if you use it, see Chapter 9).
If your data includes personally identifiable information (PII) or protected health
information (PHI), you need to consider your redaction strategy, while making sure
redaction won’t result in reduced response quality due to loss of information.
Common methods include masking, which replaces data with generic placeholders
(e.g., “Ofer Mendelevitch” becomes “XXXX”), or nulling, which removes the data
entirely. The primary problem with these approaches is that they cause significant
information loss; the system doesn’t just lose the value (like the name “Ofer Menede‐
levitch”), it loses the contextual relationship that value had with the surrounding
text. For example, redacting a medical record from “Dr. Smith prescribed Tylenol2
to Forrest” to “XXXX prescribed YYYY to ZZZZ” makes the sentence less usable for
answering questions about prescriptions.
To address this, a more advanced strategy is entity-aware redaction (or typed mask‐
ing), which replaces the sensitive data with its category (e.g., “[DOCTOR_NAME]
prescribed [MEDICATION] to [PATIENT_NAME]”). This method preserves the
semantic structure and relationships in the data, allowing the RAG model to
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
115
understand what is happening (a doctor prescribing a medicine) without exposing
the specific, private details, thereby balancing security needs with response quality.
Here is an example: we use the presidio_analyzer and presidio_anonymizer libraries
from Microsoft to perform entity-aware redaction. The AnalyzerEngine class can iden‐
tify specific types of entities like a phone number or person, and the AnonymizerEngine
can then replace them with a “token” like <PERSON> or <PHONE_NUMBER>.
from presidio_analyzer import AnalyzerEngine
from presidio_anonymizer import AnonymizerEngine
from presidio_anonymizer.entities import OperatorConfig
def entity_aware_redaction(text):
    """
    Implements the 'Typed Masking' strategy.
    Replaces sensitive data with its category (e.g., [PERSON])
    """
    analyzer = AnalyzerEngine()
    anonymizer = AnonymizerEngine()
    # 1. Detect PII entities
    results = analyzer.analyze(
        text=text, entities=["PERSON", "PHONE_NUMBER"], language='en'
    )
    # 2. Replace with entity type (preserving semantic structure)
    anonymized_result = anonymizer.anonymize(
        text=text,
        analyzer_results=results,
        operators={
            "PERSON": OperatorConfig("replace", {"new_value": "<PERSON>"}),
            "PHONE_NUMBER": OperatorConfig(
                "replace", {"new_value": "<PHONE_NUMBER>"}
            ),
        }you e
    )
    
    return anonymized_result.text
input = "Dr. Bao called 123-555-1122."
output = entity_aware_redaction(input)
print(output)
And the output is
Dr. <PERSON> called <PHONE_NUMBER>.
If you need to comply with the International Standards Organization/International
Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) 27001 standards for information prove‐
nance, then you need to be able to prove that your data’s history is trustworthy and
hasn’t been secretly altered. Hash-based tracking is the common approach here: it
creates a unique “digital fingerprint” (a hash) for your data at every step in your RAG
116 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
pipeline, providing a verifiable chain of evidence that an auditor can use to confirm
its integrity.
Data store safeguards
In a RAG pipeline, the vector DB serves as the repository for both the vector embed‐
dings and their associated textual data. With hybrid search, a separate text database
that is optimized for lexical search is also included in the implementation. And if you
are implementing knowledge graphs (see Chapter 9), add to that a graph database.
In all cases, the core requirement here is both encryption (in place and in
transit) as well as role-based access controls (RBACs), to comply with your com‐
pany’s security policy or to enforce the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR)’s “minimum necessary” principle (storing only the essential data required for
your application’s functionality, regularly reviewing and purging unnecessary data,
and implementing privacy-by-design principles to minimize exposure of sensitive
information).
As with any secure enterprise system, you need to implement—for all of these data
stores—network security best practices as well as continuous monitoring and inci‐
dent response protocols.
Preventing data leaks
Your RAG data store includes all the data that should be available to drive RAG
queries. It includes a diverse array of documents and data, each subject to different
permission levels within your organization. For example, some documents may be
accessible to all employees, while others remain confidential and are only visible to
senior management, such as the CEO or to the HR department.
A common approach to avoid potential data leaks that are permission-related is
to integrate a permission-based filtering mechanism into the query flow. This filter
leverages the company’s RBAC policies to ensure that only data authorized for the
querying user is passed to the generative LLM. By doing so, you prevent unauthor‐
ized access and mitigate the risk of exposing confidential information. This is an
effective approach, although it requires a consistent role-based permissions strategy
across all data that is being ingested into your RAG pipeline.
Regardless of how you implement this type of permissions-based defense, regular
audits of the query flow, thorough testing of filtering mechanisms, and continuous
monitoring of external interactions are critical measures to detect and prevent data
leaks.
In addition to internal access controls, a common privacy concern is data leakage to
LLM providers. Specifically, when interacting with LLMs hosted by outside vendors
(such as OpenAI, Anthropic, or Google), the call to the LLM results in sending the
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
117
internal data over the network to an externally hosted LLM to produce the generative
response. This introduces risk that sensitive data may inadvertently be stored in a way
that you did not intend. External LLM providers might log these queries or retain
temporary caches of the input data, potentially leading to data leakage. Such exposure
could occur even if the data is anonymized, as patterns or metadata might still reveal
sensitive insights.
This often leads enterprise RAG applications with highly sensitive data to require on-
premises deployment models, utilizing open source LLMs such as OpenAI’s gpt-oss,
Meta’s Llama 4, Qwen, or DeepSeek, which can be hosted within your data center or
virtual private cloud (VPC) without any potential risk to your data.
LLM generation guardrails
The generative LLM is responsible for producing the final output by combining
retrieved data with the user’s query. To align with company policies and regulatory
requirements, your RAG application must incorporate robust protections that pre‐
vent the generation of disallowed content.
These safeguards (often called guardrails, which we introduced in Chapter 1, and
discussed in more detail in Chapter 3 in “Implementing Guardrails” on page 83)
address issues such as hate speech, biased language, or any other forms of harmful or
inappropriate output.
When moving from a POC to production, these types of guardrails become a strict
requirement, and making them work at scale often requires not just careful imple‐
mentation but also comprehensive logging and monitoring to track the performance
of the RAG pipeline, identify potential violations, and facilitate rapid response in the
event of an incident.
In production, allowing end users to report problematic outputs is a simple yet effec‐
tive strategy to catch these types of issues early, enabling continuous refinement of the
system’s safety and compliance measures. By integrating these defense strategies into
your RAG application, you not only enhance the quality and safety of the generated
responses but also reinforce the overall integrity and trustworthiness of your system
in an enterprise setting.
118 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
Vendor Chaos and Integration Woes
Building a production-grade RAG stack involves more than just assembling a vector
database, an embedding model, and a generative LLM. As your stack evolves, you
may need to integrate additional components to maintain high-quality responses and
robust performance.
These components may include the following:
Content extraction
External APIs for extracting text from PDF files, Word documents, or Power‐
Point files. If you implement advanced chunking approaches, additional content
transformations may be required.
Data parsing 
APIs dedicated to parsing tables and images with high accuracy and in different
languages.
Advanced retrieval
Enhanced retrieval algorithms, such as hybrid search and reranking.
Response quality assurance
Models for detecting and correcting hallucinations.
Security and compliance
Components for encryption, data governance, role-based access controls, and PII
redaction.
Knowledge graphs 
A graph DB and specialized graph preparation flows if you integrate knowledge
graphs or GraphRAG (see Chapter 9).
This “build-it-yourself” approach often results in a fragmented and brittle architec‐
ture, where you are responsible for integrating and maintaining every connection.
Not only do you have to procure and onboard each of these systems or services,
you need to integrate all of them within your RAG stack, and make sure they
work harmoniously together, maintaining high uptime and low latency. Additionally,
integrating them into your systems monitoring infrastructure and security processes
is critical to identify vulnerabilities early and maintain overall system integrity.
To help assess the complexity incurred by integrating a new component or subsystem,
Table 4-1 provides a quick checklist you can use (your specific enterprise require‐
ments may mandate additional questions).
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
119
Table 4-1. Complexity assessment checklist
Area of evaluation
Key questions to ask vendor
API & integration
Does your service provide a stable REST API, a gRPC endpoint, or a client software development kit
(SDK) (e.g., Python, Java)?
What are the API rate limits? Is batch processing supported?
Which authentication methods are supported (e.g., simple API key, OAuth 2.0)?
Data & formats
What specific data formats are accepted (e.g., JSON, multipart/form-data)?
What is the output format? Does this output feed directly into the next component, or does it require a
custom transformation layer?
Security &
compliance
How is data encrypted in transit and at rest?
How do you deal with PII?
Does the provider meet the compliance requirements that your organization is required to meet (e.g.,
System and Organization Controls type 2 [SOC 2], HIPAA, GDPR)?
What vulnerability detection process do you have?
Performance & scale
What is your guaranteed P95/P99 latency?
How does the subsystem deal with scaling (e.g., auto-scaling, horizontal scaling)?
What is their uptime guarantee (provided in a service-level agreement, or SLA)? What are the
penalties for failure?
Monitoring &
logging
Is there a monitoring dashboard?
Can it integrate with your existing observability tools?
Support &
maintenance
What are the support channels (e.g., email, dedicated Slack channel, phone)?
What is the guaranteed response time for a critical production issue?
How are updates and new versions managed?
Support in particular can be unexpectedly complex. Consider, for example, what
happens when a bug is detected, latency rises above accepted thresholds, or response
quality suddenly drops. You may find yourself working with multiple vendors, each
with their own support staff and support SLA, leaving you to be the coordinator
between all these parties.
This is one of the areas where a more turnkey solution is extremely beneficial. Having
a single point of accountability when something goes wrong can prevent endless
headaches. An integrated platform bundles these components into a single, unified
system, simplifying the architecture and accountability.
Team and Expertise
Another important challenge is building a team that can not only implement the
initial RAG application, but also support and upgrade it over time, making the
necessary changes to support additional enterprise use cases.
If your RAG journey starts with a single use case, it is to be expected that with success
will come increased demand for additional use cases. In fact, some large financial
institutions have identified as many as four hundred generative AI use cases, and
although this is not the same for every organization, we believe that most mature
120 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
enterprises will be able to identify at least 30 use cases of generative AI that provide
significant value to their business operations in the first two years of using RAG.
RAG systems sit at the intersection of machine learning, software engineering, and
domain-specific knowledge, necessitating teams with diverse competencies.
The primary challenge lies in assembling professionals who can bridge gaps between
the following skillset buckets:
Machine learning engineering
Expertise in using embedding and reranking models correctly, using LLM infer‐
ence with the right GPUs to balance cost and latency, prompt engineering, imple‐
menting hybrid search techniques, optimizing retrieval pipelines, and specialized
knowledge in hallucination detection and correction.
If you integrate knowledge graphs in your RAG pipeline, then another whole set
of expertise is required for building them, including graph query languages (see
Chapter 9).
Data engineering
Proficiency in building scalable and highly available ETL pipelines capable of
handling efficient ingestion of unstructured data from diverse data sources (PDF
files, databases, websites, documentation, SharePoint, Jira, etc.), including pro‐
cessing such data, normalizing it, and making it ready for RAG.
DevOps/MLOps
Skills in containerization, continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/
CD), orchestration, GPU optimization, and auto-scaling, as well as monitoring
complex machine learning workflows.
Security/compliance
Skills in security, prompt injection prevention, PII redaction, data governance,
data privacy, and audit trails for generated content.
Not making this any easier—the knowledge about LLMs and RAG itself is relatively
new, and continuously changes at a speed we’ve never seen before. Keeping up to date
with all the best practices and maintaining a deep understanding of the complexities
involved can be quite challenging for most capable teams.
The challenges in assembling and maintaining highly skilled RAG teams stem from
the rapid evolution of underlying technologies and the interdisciplinary nature of
required skills. Each team member really needs to be an expert in their field, and the
intense competition for AI talent, which is only expected to intensify further, makes
this a real challenge.
The bottom line is this: to build the full RAG pipeline on your own, as an organi‐
zation, you have to be ready for continuous (and aggressive) investment in hiring,
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
121
upskilling, and continuously developing personnel with expertise in AI engineering
(AIE), machine learning engineering (MLE), DevOps, and security.
The alternative is to adopt turnkey RAG services for nondifferentiated components
while leveraging in-house domain expertise (and talent) for the needs and require‐
ments of the business.
Total Cost of Ownership
When migrating your RAG application from POC to production, it’s helpful to
consider the total cost of ownership (TCO) required and plan your budget to make
sure you have enough budget support, not only for a successful initial deployment,
but also for additional use cases of RAG and agentic RAG.
Next, we’ll cover the main components of a TCO estimate for RAG.
Direct costs
These are costs that you pay directly to a vendor for some service or component
license that’s included in your RAG stack:
Vendor management
Vendor management needs to be considered for vector embeddings and LLMs.
You will almost certainly need vendors for some components for the RAG pipe‐
line. If you have to manage many vendors, payments, and cost optimization
among different vendor components, the cost of management can become a
factor. Each additional vendor incurs security, legal, and IT overhead. There is
always the risk for vendor lock-in, which means future pricing hikes can increase
the overall cost of your RAG pipeline.
Retrieval pipeline operation
Expenses for running the retrieval pipeline, which encompasses the vector data‐
base, lexical database (if employing hybrid search), and reranking, need to be
included. It is important to note that vector databases often exhibit nonlinear
cost scaling as increased data volumes require enhanced performance, such as
low latency and high uptime.
Compute and storage
There are costs for both staging and production environments, often combining
both CPU and GPU resources, to handle complex processing tasks.
122 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
Indirect and ongoing costs
Beyond the upfront expenditures, several indirect factors contribute to the overall
TCO.
As your RAG stack grows, adding more data, expanding use cases, and increasing
query volumes, your compute and storage needs will rise over time. Furthermore,
ongoing support contracts with each vendor, regular system updates, and infrastruc‐
ture monitoring can quickly add nontrivial additional costs.
Depending on your IT organization and its requirements, you may incur costs when
integrating the RAG stack with existing enterprise software or third-party tools,
implementing additional systems for data ingestion, testing, DevOps, and monitor‐
ing, as well as security and privacy controls.
Additional total cost of ownership considerations
A thorough TCO evaluation should also factor in cybersecurity controls such as
intrusion detection, regular audits, and any additional requirements your organiza‐
tion needs to comply with.
Now, unfortunately, no system is completely resistant to downtime. Often at pro‐
duction scale, a system is required to adhere to business continuity requirements
and recovery solutions, adding even more to the costs. To address this, you can
implement (at additional cost, thus the implication to TCO) high-availability (HA)
architectures such as multi-region deployments, which use automatic failover mecha‐
nisms to rapidly redirect operations to a healthy secondary location if the primary
one fails, ensuring business continuity.
In summary, successfully migrating your RAG application from POC to production
requires a detailed and realistic assessment of both capital expenditures (CAPEX)
and operational expenditures (OPEX). By accounting for direct vendor payments,
compute and storage requirements, and a wide range of indirect costs, you can better
prepare for the true costs of scaling your RAG solution.
We find that quite often, initial cost estimates for do-it-yourself (DIY) RAG deploy‐
ments are notoriously unreliable, with actual production expenses often exceeding
projections by 3–5x. So plan carefully, budget realistically, and consider long-term
implications to achieve a successful, cost-effective production deployment.
Challenges with RAG in Production 
| 
123
Cost monitoring
Given this high risk of cost escalation, especially with pay-per-token LLM APIs and
auto-scaling compute, you should implement granular monitoring of cost with hard
alerts. In your production architecture, integrate billing and usage dashboards from
your cloud provider and LLM vendors directly into your primary monitoring system,
including budget-based alerting and rate limiting:
• Budget-based alerting automatically notifies the operations team when costs
•
approach predefined thresholds (e.g., at 50%, 80%, and 100% of the monthly
budget).
• Rate limiting prevents a single faulty service, a malicious user, or a “denial-of-
•
wallet” attack from generating a catastrophic bill for your team.
Another strategy for controlling costs is to adopt a cascading model approach,
where instead of sending every query to your most powerful (and most expensive)
LLM, you can implement a “router” logic (Figure 4-1). This router first sends the
query to a smaller, faster, and much cheaper model, and if that model provides a
high-confidence answer or if the query is flagged as “simple,” the response is returned
immediately. Only if the query is complex or the cheap model fails is it “escalated”
to the expensive frontier model. This tiered approach can dramatically reduce your
average cost per query while maintaining high quality for the most difficult user
questions.
Figure 4-1. Cascading model approach via LLM router
124 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
You can certainly implement your own LLM router, or can use existing libraries
or services like LiteLLM or Not Diamond. Regardless of how you implement it,
as always, it’s important to make sure it’s integrated into your observability and
logging systems, and not only reports the types of calls made, but also automatically
computes the costs based on specific LLM costs.
The complexity of the total cost of ownership is a common reason companies choose
turnkey RAG solutions, where a single vendor provides all the functionality for RAG.
In these cases, the vendor provides a significantly simplified cost structure, making
the TCO much more predictable and manageable, both initially and over time.
RAG Evaluation
As we mentioned in “Response Quality and Reduced Hallucinations” on page 106,
maintaining a healthy RAG pipeline with high-quality responses, low hallucinations,
low latency, and high availability can be tricky as you scale up. An important com‐
ponent that may help in addressing this challenge is a reliable RAG evaluation
framework, which we discuss in Chapter 6.
As the old adage goes, “you can’t fix what you can’t measure.” If you don’t have a
reliable framework in place for measuring response quality and quantifying halluci‐
nations, your quality may degrade over time as you scale in production, and you may
not realize it. Continuously measuring your RAG pipeline often requires scalable and
efficient implementation of retrieval metrics and generation metrics, as well as overall
end-to-end RAG response quality evaluation.
So far in this chapter, we highlighted many of the challenges you may face when
moving your RAG application from POC to production, but don’t despair. Many
companies successfully navigate this transition, and in the next section, we will walk
through some strategies to successfully navigate it.
A Reference Production Architecture
Now that we have outlined the significant challenges of moving RAG from POC to
production, let’s move from the what to the how. Addressing issues like high latency,
security, and vendor chaos requires a deliberate system design.
A robust, scalable RAG pipeline is best built as a decoupled, microservice-based
system. This architecture, as described briefly in our discussion on latency, is the key
to managing complexity and enabling independent scaling. There are many ways to
build such a system. Figure 4-2 shows one reference architecture.
A Reference Production Architecture 
| 
125
Figure 4-2. Example production architecture for RAG
126 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
Let’s review some of the details in this diagram. On the ingestion side:
Document extraction
The document extraction microservice deals with documents on ingestion.
Depending on the data source and the document type, it can extract text from
binary files, perform table or image processing, and extract metadata. For meta‐
data, if PII redaction is required, it is often done before storing the metadata.
Chunking
The chunking microservice splits documents into smaller chunks. It could be
part of the document extraction microservice, but having it as a separate service
provides more flexibility for more complex chunking strategies like semantic
chunking.
Document and query embedding
The document embedding and query embedding can be implemented as a single
microservice that hosts the embedding model, serving for both queries and
documents, or they can be separate microservices.
After ingestion processing, the embedding vectors are stored in the vector DB, and
the text itself is stored in the lexical search system. If metadata is extracted, it is also
commonly stored in the lexical search system for future retrieval.
Each one of these microservices can be implemented with high availability (multiple
instances), and, of course, they all need to implement security best practices like
end-to-end encryption.
Now for the query flow:
• The query string is sent to the query embedding service, and then to semantic
•
search using the vector database, while at the same time, the same query string is
sent over to the lexical search system.
• Relevant chunks from both vector search and lexical search are combined and
•
sent to the reranking service for final relevance ranking.
• In this stage, if needed, PII masking can be applied before chunks are sent via
•
a prompt to the LLM, followed by guardrails—all inside the generative microser‐
vice—resulting in the final response.
As mentioned in “High Latency” on page 109 earlier in this chapter, caching can be
applied throughout this architecture in the retrieval, chunk, and full response levels.
Security needs to be addressed in every layer and every component—at rest and in
transit—and vulnerability detection and mitigation best practices should be applied
across each component and microservice.
A Reference Production Architecture 
| 
127
What’s not shown in this diagram are the three key aspects of MLOps: logging,
monitoring, and observability, which need to be reliably integrated into each of the
components and microservices, according to your organization’s best practices.
With this understanding of the main issues, and an idea of what a production
architecture might look like in more detail, you are ready to plan and execute your
transition from POC to production.
Successful Transition from Proof of Concept to Production
Now that you know the risks and challenges, you are ready to plan your RAG
production deployment.
As with the deployment of any complex technology stack, careful planning can help
in mitigating risks, and generative AI is no exception. In most cases, the POC already
provided some initial hands-on experience, so you have a good set of questions to
ask, and likely a good sense for what is important.
Summarize What You Learned in the Proof of Concept
Start with creating a report that summarizes all of the learnings from the POC. Here
are some example questions and details that you might include in your report:
• Which components did you use in the POC: vector database, embedding model,
•
reranker, LLM, etc.?
• How was data collected and ingested from source data stores? Did you imple‐
•
ment any special processing for tables or images? Were there any data sources
that required special attention?
• What was the prompt used for your RAG POC? How well did it work in terms of
•
generating appropriate responses and minimizing hallucinations?
• Which advanced RAG capabilities did you test (e.g., hybrid search, knowledge
•
graphs)?
• Did the response quality meet your expectations for the POC?
•
— How was latency measured?
—
— How did you evaluate the response quality?
—
• What unexpected issues did you uncover?
•
• What functionality did you not have in your POC and wanted to include, and
•
why?
Once you write down this report, you are ready to define the goals for your actual
production implementation.
128 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
Define Goals and Requirements
Before you get started with actual implementation, it really helps if you define the
goals and requirements for your production deployment. In fact, you might want
to revisit the business goals to ensure that the POC’s objectives align with your
production goals.
Where applicable, use key performance indicators (KPIs) to define the requirements
in a numeric form. You can fill in the results from the POC report and define how
much better you might want this to look in your production deployment.
Table 4-2 shows some of the KPIs and requirements that we’ve seen when working
with many Vectara customers—feel free to use this list, or adapt it to your needs. We
filled in sample values for demonstrative purposes, but, of course, values from your
POC or your goals for production may be different.
Table 4-2. Example list of RAG production system considerations
KPI/requirement
Definition
POC
Production
Query latency
Mean and median query response time (in
seconds), measured over a set of 50 sample
queries
Mean: 7.5
Median: 8.5
Mean: 4.5
Median: 4
Uptime and
availability
The percentage of time the system is
operational
Not measured
Uptime >= 99.99%
Response quality
RAG evaluation metrics such as context
precision, context recall, hallucination,
answer relevance, and average UMBRELA
scores (more about these in Chapter 6)
Not measured
CP >= 0.9
CR >= 0.8
% Hallucation <= 0.05
AR >= 0.9
UMBRELA>2.5
Data ingestion
Data sources supported,
file types supported,
requirement for refresh
Only local PDF
files
File types: PDF, DOCX, PPTX, HTML
Sources: web pages, S3, Snowflake,
Notion
Refreshes daily
Retrieval pipeline
Supported retrieval techniques
Vector search
only
Vector search
Hybrid search
Relevance reranking
Diversity reranking
Chunking
Supported chunking strategies
Fixed
Fixed
Semantic
LLM selection
The LLMs that are supported for generation
OpenAI GPT-4o
OpenAI GPT-5.1
Anthropic Claude 4.5
Llama 3.3 70B
Deepseek-R1
Embedding model
selection
Supported embedding models
Anything on
Hugging Face
Anything on Hugging Face
OpenAI and Cohere
Knowledge graph
Does the system include a knowledge
graph?
No
No
Successful Transition from Proof of Concept to Production 
| 
129
In addition to the items listed in Table 4-2, there are other system considerations to
plan for in your production deployment:
Hardware
Consider which machines you need (both CPU and GPU machines), as well
as memory capacity and networking requirements. Also consider high avail‐
ability requirements and staging environments, which often require additional
hardware.
Development environment and process
Where would code be hosted? Which CI/CD system will you use? What unit,
integration, or regression testing will you want to implement?
Data connectivity
Which enterprise systems does the RAG application need to connect to for
data ingestion, and how would credentials be provided? Consider implementing
RBAC in your RAG to prevent data leakage.
Data security and governance
How does the system adhere to audit requirements, SOC-2 compliance, HIPAA
compliance, or the GDPR (whatever is applicable in your organization)? Is all
data encrypted end-to-end across all components?
Monitoring
How would you implement monitoring? Consider systems monitoring for
uptime, latency monitoring, as well as user satisfaction (see Chapter 6 for RAG
evaluation metrics).
Budget
What is the expected monthly budget allocated for the RAG application? How
does performance degrade when you have a budget overrun?
Once the planning is complete, you can transition to implementation. This requires
the traditional execution excellence skills in project management, Agile development,
and strong team coordination. Successful technical implementation in your enter‐
prise is highly dependent on R&D and IT practices, which vary significantly from one
organization to the next, and is beyond the scope of this book.
So let’s fast forward—your first production deployment of the first RAG use case is
two weeks out, and you are now ready to roll it organization-wide. What comes next?
Ensuring Continued RAG Success
First and foremost, you want to ensure a smooth and successful launch. This often
requires training employees or customers on the new RAG application, making sure
130 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
they are fully aware of all the capabilities and understand when to use it, and how to
do so in the most effective way.
While users are using the RAG application, it’s critical to pay careful attention to the
metrics you have carefully built in—not only user satisfaction with query responses,
but also latency and system performance.
You might, for example, see query volume peak in the first few days, only to drop
back to a much smaller volume of daily queries after two to three weeks. That likely
indicates a problem somewhere—maybe the system is not providing useful responses
to its users, and thus they revert back to their old ways of solving things. Maybe it’s
a latency issue, and users don’t want to wait. With good logging and monitoring in
place, you should be able to pinpoint the exact issue and work on remediation; for
example, if latency has increased, that could easily be detected in your monitoring
systems. Similarly, with detailed logging for each query of the response and a thumbs-
up/thumbs-down indicator, you can quickly pinpoint problematic queries that users
think are low-quality and investigate if the issue is inaccurate retrieval or generation,
hallucination, or just missing data.
It is not uncommon for some issues to arise in the first two weeks post-deployment—
things you didn’t expect, or that did not come up during your pre-launch testing. So
you want to make sure that you look at all the metrics, and react quickly to resolve
any issues.
Having strong monitoring and observability capabilities as part of the implementa‐
tion dramatically improves your chance of success. By looking at user queries and
responses, understanding latency metrics, and recording any issues that arise in
day-to-day operations, you can quickly identify real application issues and move fast
to remediate them.
Assuming the initial launch goes smoothly (outside of some issues you quickly move
to remediate, which you should expect), there still remains a significant amount of
work going forward. This will range from menial tasks like systems maintenance, or
compute upgrades as query volume and usage grows, to fixing system uptime issues.
You may need to upgrade components from time to time—for example, if you use a
vector database, it may need to be upgraded once you identify a security vulnerability.
Integrating new techniques into your RAG pipeline is a bigger challenge.
For example, let’s imagine that a new embedding model is released that is shown to
have a consistent 5% quality improvement across all your use cases. Wouldn’t you
want to adopt this? Of course you would. To do this, you would have to implement
this new model in your RAG pipeline (both at ingest and query time), test everything
end-to-end, update any system dependencies, and run a RAG evaluation (see Chap‐
ter 6) comparing old versus new to prove that all works well and you see that 5%
improvement.
Ensuring Continued RAG Success 
| 
131
This may be much easier said than done. For example, this new model may have a
much higher latency. Or it may require a different type of GPU machine, which you
might need to acquire or rent from a hyperscaler. And so on…
And this is just one example. You might want to incorporate a new type of LLM,
a better hybrid search algorithm, a new reranker, or an improved hallucination
detection or correction component. In each upgrade to your RAG stack, make sure
to follow a similar process as you did in the initial production deployment: plan, test,
deploy, and monitor.
Conclusion
Moving from a POC to production deployment of RAG at enterprise scale is not easy.
It requires a full understanding of all the requirements (security, governance, data
privacy, systems operations) as well as maintaining a highly skilled team with diverse
expertise.
It’s important to keep in mind that not only do you need to implement the first
version of the RAG application, but also support ongoing maintenance, upgrades,
and any issues that may arise. This includes maintaining “data hygiene” at the source;
the organization must have mature processes to ensure that the documents being
fed into the RAG pipeline are clean, deduplicated, and regularly updated. As the
generative AI landscape evolves with new techniques to improve response quality
and reduce hallucinations, better LLMs and embedding models, and more efficient
components and hardware, keeping your system up-to-date may be challenging and
requires considerable investment.
Most importantly, plan not only for continuous improvement but also for new use
cases your organization will want to implement to gain more benefit from your RAG
stack.
Turnkey RAG platforms are quickly becoming a strong alternative to build-your-own.
In this case, the vendor takes on this burden of quality implementation, upgrades,
improvements, security, privacy, and continuous monitoring, leaving the developers
with the focus on the RAG application itself—what data it should be based on, and
where to integrate it into your business workflow.
In the next chapter, you will learn about turn-key RAG platforms, what advantages
they have over DIY systems, and what some of their limitations are.
132 
| 
Chapter 4: Deploying RAG to Production
CHAPTER 5
The RAG Platform
In Chapters 2 and 3, you learned all about do-it-yourself RAG—from the basic com‐
ponents of embedding models and vector databases to more advanced components
like hybrid search, reranking, and hallucination detection. Chapter 4 explored why
taking a DIY RAG application from a simple proof of concept to a fully production-
ready deployment is often more complex than it initially appears, highlighted the key
challenges involved in scaling RAG in a real-world environment, and suggested steps
to take for a successful DIY deployment in production.
A “RAG platform” (also known as RAG-as-a-service or turnkey RAG) refers to a
technology platform that implements most, if not all, of the RAG components behind
a developer API. This abstracts away a lot of the complexity of building RAG,
letting developers instead focus on the RAG application itself—what data should the
responses be grounded in, and how the application integrates into your business or
application flow.
In this chapter, we will cover what a RAG platform provides and how to choose one
that best fits your needs. We’ll demonstrate the usage of such a platform with Vectara.
DIY Versus Platform RAG
When you build a DIY RAG stack, you have granular control over each component
of the RAG pipeline. This includes selecting and configuring vector databases (e.g.,
Pinecone, Weaviate, Zilliz, Qdrant), hosting and serving any embedding model (e.g.,
Cohere’s Embed v4 or Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B), defining and implementing chunk‐
ing strategies, and customizing the LLM generation process.
The power is in your hands to customize your RAG stack, but so is the responsibility
of provisioning, integrating, scaling, and maintaining the underlying infrastructure.
133
