In contrast, a RAG platform provides a managed, end-to-end solution, abstracting
the infrastructure complexities. Developers interact with the service through APIs to
ingest data from their data sources, select and configure the retrieval pipeline, select
embedding or generative models, and deploy a RAG application with minimal setup.
It’s precisely this freedom from infrastructure overhead that gives RAG platforms
their edge: with a DIY approach, you spend considerable effort on non-core tasks
like server provisioning, vector DB optimization, ensuring high availability and low
latency, and managing security updates for each component. RAG platform providers
take over these operational overheads, allowing you to focus solely on building the
application logic and delivering value to end users. This translates to faster develop‐
ment cycles, reduced DevOps workload, and potentially lower upfront infrastructure
costs, as services are often offered on a pay-as-you-go or subscription basis.
Furthermore, a RAG platform often comes with built-in optimizations for low
latency, high accuracy, and cost effectiveness, leveraging the provider’s expertise in
managing large-scale RAG systems. RAG platform providers may also offer features
like data source connectors, advanced monitoring and observability, as well as secu‐
rity and privacy compliance out of the box, which would require significant engineer‐
ing effort to replicate in a DIY setup.
As shown in Figure 5-1, a RAG platform provides a central control plane that enables
governance over security, accuracy, cost, and performance.
While a DIY approach offers maximum flexibility and customization, RAG platforms
are increasingly attractive for their convenience, speed of deployment, and reduced
operational complexity. However, this ease of use comes with the risk of platform
lock-in and potential migration costs should you need to switch providers.
Now that you know what all the components are within a RAG stack and how they
work (from Chapters 2 and 3), you have the necessary foundation to make a decision
about whether to create your own RAG system or use a RAG platform, weighing the
pros and cons with regard to the needs of your organization. In this chapter, we’ll
discuss some nuances that will help you refine your understanding and make a fully
informed decision.
134 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
Figure 5-1. A RAG platform enables centralized management of security, accuracy, cost,
and performance, while empowering developers to interact with a standardized “RAG
API”
Core RAG Capabilities
The first consideration, of course, is the quality of the RAG response, which depends
on the capabilities of both data ingestion and the query/retrieval pipeline. Let’s review
each of these components to better understand the trade-offs between DIY and
platform for each one of them.
Embedding models
Many RAG platforms offer a default embedding model. If you need to support
non-English languages, it’s important to understand the embedding model’s support
for other languages and its performance in the languages you require.
Some RAG platform providers support a bring-your-own (BYO) embedding model.
This feature provides you with some additional comfort and future risk mitigation:
if the built-in embedding model will not be a good fit for a future use case, you
can just replace it with a new embedding model that might be a better fit. Even so,
remember that you have already generated embedding vectors for all your data, and
DIY Versus Platform RAG 
| 
135
switching to a new embedding model requires re-encoding your entire dataset, which
adds additional time and cost.
As you learned in Chapter 2, embedding models come in various sizes (or vector
dimensions). Larger vector dimensions can potentially capture more nuanced seman‐
tic detail, leading to higher retrieval accuracy overall. However, that is not always as
impactful on overall accuracy, especially if combined with strong reranking models in
the second step of retrieval (see “Advanced retrieval” on page 137 in Chapter 3 for a
detailed discussion about reranking).
Computationally, higher-dimensionality vectors are more expensive to process.
Indexing these larger vectors requires more computational power and time, which
in a DIY setup means investing in more powerful CPUs or GPUs. Querying also
becomes more resource-intensive, as calculating similarity scores (e.g., cosine similar‐
ity) between high-dimensional vectors involves more operations. This can lead to
increased latency or the need for more compute instances to maintain performance,
adding to operational costs.
In a RAG platform, increases in memory requirements or computational demands
fall on the vendor, and are typically reflected in the pricing. Therefore, if the BYO
embedding model is a requirement, ask your vendor if this is a supported option, and
ensure that you understand what extra costs that might entail.
Vector databases
When building your own RAG stack, you can select an open source vector data‐
base like Milvus, QDrant, or Weaviate, or a proprietary one like Pinecone, or use
the vector feature embedded in an existing database like Snowflake or MongoDB.
Whichever one you use, it usually provides fine-grained control over indexing strate‐
gies, sharding, and hardware or cloud infrastructure selection, providing you with
the flexibility to optimize for your specific data, query patterns, and performance
requirements, while better managing failure isolation. Obviously, this control comes
with the responsibility of setup, ongoing maintenance, scaling, security patching, and
the need for in-house expertise in vector database management, which can translate
to significant operational overhead and hidden costs, even when the software is open
source.
An important consideration here is the dimensionality of the embedding model.
Larger vector sizes, while potentially capturing more nuanced semantic detail, may
lead to increased storage requirements, resulting in added costs and higher latency.
Supporting higher vector dimensions can significantly impact costs for storage and
processing for a DIY stack.
A RAG platform bundles the vector database as part of the managed service, leaving
the complexities of vector database setup and configuration, scaling, maintenance,
136 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
and optimization to the provider. Clearly, the impact of larger vectors also impacts
the cost for the RAG platform, and, thus, they may be reflected in their pricing.
If you require deep customization and have the engineering talent to manage com‐
plex database infrastructure, DIY can be a good option. Conversely, if speed to
market, ease of use, and offloading operational burdens are important, and you’re
comfortable with the provider’s chosen vector database capabilities, a RAG platform
can be a more efficient route.
Advanced retrieval
As we’ve mentioned already multiple times, a robust and accurate retrieval pipeline is
probably the most impactful component of RAG needed for accurate results. When
you build a DIY RAG stack, it is common to start with just vector search (i.e., cosine
similarity between embedding vectors, as we described in Chapter 2), and quickly
improve upon this baseline with more advanced techniques like hybrid search, and
one or more reranking options. Beyond performance, this pipeline also serves as a
critical safety boundary; by narrowing the context provided to the generative LLM
to only the most relevant and verified data, you significantly reduce the risk of
hallucinations and “off-track” responses.
When you build your own stack, you need to implement each part of this robust
retrieval pipeline. Vector search is relatively easy once you have a vector database
in place and you’ve chosen the embedding model. However, implementing hybrid
search and rerankers can be a more difficult task and may require additional exper‐
tise, time, and effort. But it’s important—this is where you get the really big gains in
retrieval relevance and system reliability.
When considering DIY versus a RAG platform, look carefully at the retrieval capabil‐
ities available from your RAG platform provider and their commitment to continue
to innovate in retrieval, and compare that to your team’s skills and expertise in
building and maintaining search technology.
Prompt engineering
The main prompt engineering effort that’s part of your DIY RAG stack is that final
prompt you use when sending the retrieved chunks to the generative LLM. As you
saw in Chapters 2 and 3, that prompt serves two key purposes. First, it is the main
prompt that guides the LLM on its task: summarizing the chunks retrieved while
providing a coherent response to the user query. Second, careful prompt design (and
continuous updates) can serve the purpose of fighting prompt injection attacks and
can help reduce hallucinations and bias.
Unfortunately, not all LLMs behave in the same way when it comes to prompts. Some
LLMs have good compliance with the instructions in the prompt, while others don’t
always follow your instructions. So don’t think of the prompt as something you set
DIY Versus Platform RAG 
| 
137
once and forget in your DIY RAG stack—you may need to adapt it to new LLMs as
they become available, as well as different use cases and applications.
Here, a RAG platform provides significant strategic benefit. Beyond deep expertise in
prompt engineering, and staying current with LLM-specific nuances, these platforms
enable centralized prompt governance. At an enterprise scale, this prevents an incon‐
sistent safety posture across various teams and ensures that security protocols, hallu‐
cination checks, and bias mitigations are applied uniformly across every application..
Support for multiple LLMs
With a DIY RAG stack, you have full control and flexibility over which LLM to call.
You can use one of the commercial options like OpenAI, Anthropic, or Google, or an
open-weight model like Llama 4, Qwen, Kimi, or DeepSeek.
Choosing the right LLM for your RAG system might seem quite easy, but there is a
subtlety here to consider: the performance characteristics of LLMs may change over
time. That is, they may change how they behave or respond to various types of inputs;
see, for example, the GPT-4o sycophancy incident. If you use an open-weight model,
then you must take care of hosting it yourself on GPU-equipped machines.
In that respect, a RAG platform provider becomes your trusted partner to determine
the best LLM to use for your application, takes on the burden of testing various
LLMs, keeps track of their changing characteristics, and makes sure your RAG
application works properly and maintains a high quality of generated responses
end-to-end.
In some applications, using an LLM that is fine-tuned over an industry-specific
dataset may be beneficial. With DIY RAG, you can easily achieve that and replace
your LLM with a self-hosted version of the fine-tuned LLM. With a RAG platform,
having a BYO LLM capability is important, and if you expect a fine-tuned generative
LLM as part of your application stack, make sure to explore that capability with your
RAG platform provider.
Hallucination detection and correction
As we’ve discussed in Chapter 3 in “Controlling Hallucinations in RAG” on page 88,
hallucination detection and correction are key components in the RAG flow.
By identifying responses from the LLM that are factually inconsistent with the infor‐
mation in the retrieved chunks, and correcting such responses, you can dramatically
improve the quality of responses from your RAG application.
When looking at RAG platform providers, make sure there is support for this capa‐
bility. If you use a DIY RAG stack, you will need to plan for implementing these
components in your stack and supporting them over time.
138 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
In addition to core RAG capabilities, it’s important to consider your data sources and
what data ingestion will look like in your application.
Data Sources
Many RAG platform providers support data connectors to a growing list of data
sources, such as email systems, Google Drive, SharePoint, Notion, Jira, Confluence,
web pages, internal documentation, various database systems, Salesforce, or even Box
or Dropbox for files.
If you are considering a RAG platform, explore the data connectors that are available
in depth to make sure they fit your requirements:
• What file formats are supported?
•
• Do connectors support data refresh?
•
• How is error handling managed? Can the connector surface partial failures or
•
data gaps (e.g., skipped files) to ensure the LLM isn’t working with an incomplete
knowledge base? Can a connector recover graciously from an error?
• Do connectors support granular RBAC and real-time permission syncing to pre‐
•
vent data leakage and ensure users only retrieve information they are authorized
to see?
• How easy or difficult would it be to deploy in your IT environment?
•
• What logging and monitoring is available to ensure robust and stable data
•
connectivity?
If you use a DIY RAG stack, you have three options for handling external data:
• Build and maintain these connectors yourself, and add new connectors as you
•
need them.
• Use an open source data connector project like Airbyte or an LLM orchestration
•
framework that includes data connectors like LlamaIndex or LangChain.
• Use a commercial solution like Airbyte Cloud, LlamaCloud, or similar.
•
Whatever your approach, it’s important to take a hard look at the data sources you
need for your application, and consider the work effort to implement connectors—
not only for initial ingest but also for data refresh and updates.
Table 5-1 provides a comparison of a few available data connectors for DIY RAG
(although this continues to evolve, and new connectors are available constantly).
DIY Versus Platform RAG 
| 
139
Table 5-1. Open source data connector projects
Project name
Approx. total
connectors
Data refresh support
LangChain
130+
External schedulers + vector store ops
LlamaIndex
160+
LlamaCloud supports incremental updates
Airbyte
600+
Built-in incremental sync (cursor, CDC), scheduling, Vector DB destination
processing
Meltano
600+
Yes, as long as there is a Singer tap that implements it
Datavolo (part of
Snowflake)
300+
Yes, NiFi‐based processors support true incremental fetching
As you can see, most providers have built-in connectors to a relatively large number
of data sources (anywhere from 130 to 600). Beyond the simple list of source types,
it’s important to understand exactly how each connector works and whether it sup‐
ports the specific data you have and need to ingest.
For example, an email connector may work with Gmail, but not with Outlook.
A HubSpot connector might only import part of the customer relationship man‐
agement (CRM) system. A Jira connector may only import tickets but not their
attachments.
RAG Sprawl and Centralized Governance
Building DIY RAG, while offering full granular control over your RAG pipeline, may
lead to what is known as RAG sprawl—the proliferation of disparate, independently
managed RAG applications across your organization.
Each such RAG application might come with its own choice of vector database (e.g.,
Weaviate, Zilliz, etc.), embedding model, and generative LLM, as well as different
implementations for the data ingest process. This can quickly become a nightmare for
central IT, which will have to manage multiple types of RAG components, each with
its own complexity, and many of which might be incompatible with organizational
policies.
From a security perspective, each DIY RAG application might have its own imple‐
mentation of access controls, data handling policies, and security configurations,
making it challenging to enforce consistent security measures and effectively monitor
for vulnerabilities. This fragmentation leads to “policy drift,” where security and com‐
pliance guarantees erode over time as individual pipelines are updated or modified
without centralized oversight.
This lack of standardization can (inadvertently) lead to data silos with varying levels
of protection, increasing the risk of data breaches, unauthorized access, and compli‐
ance failures with regulations like the GDPR or California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA).
140 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
This is one area where a RAG platform might really shine, since it often offers a
centralized and standardized approach to deploying and managing RAG applications,
including the following services:
• Managing IT resources like storage and compute (including both CPUs and
•
GPUs)
• Built-in mechanisms for data governance, observability, auditability, and release
•
processes
• Security features such as robust access control mechanisms, encryption proto‐
•
cols, and audit trails
This ability to apply IT policies consistently across all RAG applications helps to
avoid RAG sprawl.
For example, consider a scenario where the marketing department builds a RAG
application, inadvertently using a noncompliant vector database and ingesting raw
EU customer data without proper GDPR masking. Simultaneously, the legal team
builds a separate RAG system for contract review using a different, highly secure
LLM. Central IT has no visibility into the marketing app’s compliance risk and no
way to enforce a single data handling standard. A RAG platform solves this by pro‐
viding a single, pre-configured “golden path.” It would enforce the use of an approved
vector store and automatically apply PII redaction rules to all new applications,
regardless of which department builds them.
This centralization also prevents resource duplication and cuts costs. In a RAG sprawl
environment, the data science team might deploy a large, expensive embedding
model for a specific project. The sales team, unaware, could then deploy the exact
same model on the same data for their own chatbot, doubling the ingestion costs.
This duplication extends beyond just data; both teams are now paying for separate
storage, using high-demand GPU/CPU resources to run inference, and tying up
separate engineering and DevOps teams for upgrade and maintenance.
From a pure security standpoint, this consolidation is critical. When RAG applica‐
tions sprawl, each one becomes a separate, isolated target that must be independently
secured, monitored, and patched. A vulnerability scanner might not even be aware
of a new RAG app built by the legal team. A platform-based approach, however,
provides a single, hardened perimeter for security teams to manage. It allows them
to apply consistent role-based access controls, enforce uniform encryption standards,
and run comprehensive vulnerability tests across all RAG applications at once. If a
new vulnerability is discovered in a shared component, it can be patched once at the
platform level, instantly protecting every application that uses it, rather than hunting
down dozens of siloed, at-risk deployments.
DIY Versus Platform RAG 
| 
141
As companies continue even today to avoid “shadow IT” (the use of IT-related hard‐
ware or software by a department or individual without the knowledge of the IT or
security group within the organization), they are now working even harder to avoid
its new incarnation: “shadow AI.” The fundamental challenge, as these examples
show, is that the cost, compliance, and security risks of shadow AI are orders of
magnitude greater.
Cost and Upkeep
Beyond security and governance, consider the financial and operational implications
of choosing between a DIY RAG system and a RAG platform.
A DIY approach is often the first step in the RAG journey, as teams learn about
generative AI and build the first prototypes to quickly demonstrate value to the
organization, and gain an understanding of the most impactful use cases.
DIY often appears to be less expensive, if one only considers direct subscription
fees: token costs for using LLMs. However, even direct API use costs can balloon
pretty quickly if you are not carefully monitoring and controlling API usage and
continuously optimizing it.
The true costs of RAG, however, encompass much more. To get a more realistic
picture, consider the costs incurred due to the following:
• Setup, configuration, and ongoing maintenance of underlying infrastructure
•
(vector databases, LLMs, embedding models, rerankers, etc.)
• Extensive time required for research, design, and testing of each RAG component
•
• The continuous operational burden of maintaining the infrastructure, patching
•
security vulnerabilities, updating models and algorithms, prompt re-engineering,
improving your retrieval pipeline, hallucination mitigation controls, and scaling
the infrastructure as usage grows
These responsibilities require a dedicated team with specialized skills, representing
a persistent operational expenditure and a drain on internal resources that could
otherwise be focused on delivering core business innovation.
In contrast, a RAG platform shifts much (although not all) of this ongoing mainte‐
nance and operational overhead to the vendor, which can help replace this high and
unpredictable TCO with a more predictable one, often in one of these two distinct
pricing models:
The developer-centric consumption model
These are designed for bottoms-up adoption, featuring free tiers and low initial
monthly subscriptions ($50–$500) that include a base set of resources. The TCO,
142 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
however, remains variable, as costs are driven by granular, pay-as-you-go over‐
ages. Examples include Ragie.ai and LlamaCloud.
The all-in-one enterprise model
These are designed for large enterprises and priced for TCO predictability (Vec‐
tara is an example). They often feature an annual subscription that includes
a large annual bundle of “credits”—an abstract unit of value that bundles all
underlying costs (API calls, data storage, compute, and retrieval) into a single,
predictable metric.
Whether the pricing is consumption-based or annual subscription, these fees cover
updates, security, and platform evolution. With scalability and future-proofing in
mind, RAG platforms provide a streamlined path, since vendors are incentivized to
keep their platforms at the cutting edge, incorporating the latest advancements in
LLMs, retrieval techniques, and security practices, letting their customers focus on
their specific RAG use cases.
Deployment Options
When considering deployment options for your RAG stack, keep in mind that the
choice about whether to employ a SaaS solution, a more customizable VPC deploy‐
ment, or a fully self-managed on-premises setup has implications regarding the level
of control you’ll have over it, support SLAs, areas of responsibility, and resource
allocation.
DIY RAG deployment options
For DIY RAG, clearly, you have a lot of flexibility and can deploy almost anywhere.
The limitations come from the components.
For example, if your vector database is a managed service and you need an on-
premises RAG system, then you would need to choose a different vector database
and deploy it locally. Similarly, in an on-premises environment, you may not be able
to use a commercial API-based LLM, embedding model, or reranker due to a policy
preventing data from going out of your environment, and would need to rely instead
on a self-hosted LLM.
RAG platform deployment options
Most RAG platform vendors only support the SaaS deployment option, where the
vendor manages the entire stack and pays the hyperscaler provider directly for
infrastructure costs, although some do support VPC and on-premises options. In
the SaaS model, many RAG platform providers ensure that adequate security and
data governance controls are in place, ensuring their SaaS offering complies with
HIPAA (the US’s Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act), the GDPR
DIY Versus Platform RAG 
| 
143
(the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation), or SOC-2 (Service Organization
Controls 2). However, your organization may require greater control over its data and
environment, or even an “air-gapped” installation, where no data leaves your systems,
and if that’s the case, the SaaS approach is simply a nonstarter.
Deploying a RAG platform within a VPC of a public cloud provider like AWS,
Azure, or Google Cloud ensures the RAG application operates in an isolated segment
of the cloud, allowing for more granular control over network security and data
privacy. This model demands more cloud architecture and MLOps expertise from
your team, to manage the RAG application and its cloud resources, and usually suits
businesses that already implement other cloud-based applications or have compliance
requirements that can be met within a controlled cloud environment.
The on-premises deployment of a RAG platform represents the highest level of
control, and also the greatest responsibility. Hosting the entire RAG stack, including
all hardware and software components, within an organization’s own data centers
ensures that data never leaves the company’s physical perimeter. This approach is
often favored by companies with highly sensitive data (such as financial services firms
or healthcare companies), stringent regulatory obligations, or the need for air-gapped
(no internet connection to the outside world) environments.
While offering maximum security and low-latency access, on-premises RAG necessi‐
tates solving specific architectural challenges:
Hardware infrastructure
(CAPEX versus OPEX): You swap API costs for significant upfront hard‐
ware investment. High-performance RAG requires enterprise-grade GPUs (e.g.,
Nvidia A100s/H100s) with sufficient VRAM to hold LLM weights in memory.
Local model inference
Because an air-gapped environment prevents calls to external APIs (like
OpenAI), you cannot use commercial LLMs. Instead, you must rely on open-
weight models or self-hosted models (e.g., Llama 4, Mistral, DeepSeek, gpt-oss)
and manage local inference servers. It is not just the LLM that is affected; stan‐
dard ingestion pipelines often rely on cloud-based OCR or parsing APIs, and in
an on-premises setup, you must deploy local alternatives for every step, including
embedding models, rerankers, and multimodal processing tools for images or
tables.
Operational overhead
Your team takes full responsibility for managing the infrastructure, patching OS
security vulnerabilities, manually updating model weights, managing container
orchestration (often via Kubernetes), as well as logging and monitoring of all
systems.
144 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
Ultimately, the decision between SaaS, VPC, and on-premises RAG hinges on a
careful evaluation of your organization’s priorities concerning data security, control,
customization needs, available technical expertise, budget, and the desired speed
of deployment. There’s no one-size-fits-all answer; SaaS prioritizes ease and speed,
on-premises prioritizes control and data isolation, and VPC offers a flexible middle
ground.
To provide an example of a full-fledged RAG platform, in the next section, we
look at Vectara, reviewing its standardized API to better understand how its API
helps developers control data ingestion, query parametrization, and hallucination
mitigation, and prevent RAG sprawl.
Example RAG Platform: Vectara
The DIY approach to building RAG involves picking and integrating every compo‐
nent, whether they are open source (like LlamaIndex, LangChain, Weaviate, etc.) or
managed services (like Cohere, Pinecone, Gemini, and OpenAI).
The major cloud providers offer a middle ground between DIY and platform, with
“platforms of services” like Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases, Google Cloud Vertex
AI Search, and Azure AI Search. These are powerful toolkits that simplify DIY,
but they still require the developer to select, configure, and orchestrate multiple
components, such as wiring up a separate vector database or manually chaining the
retrieval and generation API calls.
This contrasts with true end-to-end RAG platforms (such as Vectara or Nuclia,),
which bundle all components (document extraction, chunking, embedding, vector
storage, retrieval, generation, and hallucination detection) into a single, unified API,
hiding the complexity from the developer. This allows the developer to focus on
building their RAG application instead of managing RAG infrastructure.
To see a RAG platform in action, let’s demonstrate these principles through code.
We will use Vectara as our example platform because we have ready access to the
necessary components for demonstration, but you can perform similar explorations
with other options like Nuclia.
Getting Started
To get started with Vectara, first create an account (Figure 5-2). Once you have an
account, you can use the Console, which is your web-based interface for managing
your Vectara account, corpora, and data.
Example RAG Platform: Vectara 
| 
145
Figure 5-2. The Vectara Console, which allows you to manage your Vectara account,
create a corpus, upload data, and try queries
In Vectara, a corpus refers to the virtual container of all the data that you ingested,
after it’s been pre-processed, cleaned, and organized for querying. Each corpus is
isolated, allowing you to have distinct datasets for different applications. For example,
you might have one corpus for your company’s internal documentation, another for
customer support tickets, and a third for product reviews.
Documents in Vectara are the individual pieces of information that reside within a
corpus and then subsequently used for search and generation of responses to queries.
Now that you understand these basic terms, it’s time to create a corpus (Figure 5-3):
1. Navigate to the “Corpora” section (often on a left sidebar).
1.
2. Click “Create corpus.”
2.
3. You’ll be prompted to provide the following:
3.
Name
A user-friendly name for your corpus.
Key (corpus key)
A unique corpus identifier used in API requests.
146 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
Description (optional)
Any text you want to use for explaining the content or purpose of the corpus.
Embedding model
Select the model for vectorizing your data. In this case, please choose “Boo‐
merang,” Vectara’s built-in embedding model.
Filter attributes (optional but recommended)
Define metadata fields you intend to use for filtering. You’ll specify the
attribute name, its data type (text, integer, boolean, real), and whether it
applies at the document level (doc) or document-part level (part). You can
also choose if it should be indexed for faster filtering.
4. Once created, the corpus is ready to receive data.
4.
Figure 5-3. “Create corpus” screen in the Vectara Console
Example RAG Platform: Vectara 
| 
147
Before you can actually work with the corpus using the API, you need to create a
Vectara API key. There are three types of API keys in Vectara:
Personal API key
This key provides full permissions to any API operation on your Vectara account.
Query-only API key
This key, as its name implies, provides query-only access to the corpus.
Query+index API key
This type of key provides permissions for both indexing data (directly or via file
upload) and querying the corpus.
For all the examples below, we will use the corpus key “RAGBOOK,” and assume that
you have created a query+index API key or personal API key in the code examples.
Vectara also supports access to all API functionality via OAuth 2.0
(as opposed to via an API key), but digging into that is beyond the
scope of this book. If you’re interested in learning more about this,
see the documentation page.
Ingesting Data into Vectara
Now that we have a corpus ready, let’s see what options Vectara provides for upload‐
ing and indexing data.
File upload
We start with file upload: you can upload files of various types (like PDF, Word, PPT,
HTML, Markdown, or text) into Vectara using the upload_file endpoint. Here’s an
example:
import requests
import os
corpus_key = "RAGBOOK"
api_key = os.getenv("VECTARA_API_KEY")
url = f"https://api.vectara.io/v2/corpora/{corpus_key}/upload_file"
payload={}
files=[
  ('file',
  ( 'pet_policy',
    open('pet_policy.pdf','rb'),
    'application/octet-stream')
  )
]
headers = {
148 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
  'Accept': 'application/json',
  'x-api-key': api_key
}
response = requests.request(
"POST", 
url, 
headers=headers, 
data=payload, 
files=files
)
res = response.json()
print(res)
The API response provides useful information about the file upload operation:
{
    'id': 'pet_policy', 
    'metadata': {
        'Producer': 'Skia/PDF m118 Google Docs Renderer', 
        'Title': 'Employee Handbook - Company Pet Policy'
    }, 
    'storage_usage': {'bytes_used': 9215, 'metadata_bytes_used': 5803}
}
This is what happened behind the scenes:
1. Vectara received the file content. In this case, it was a PDF file, so Vectara
1.
extracted the actual text from the file.
2. This text was chunked using Vectara’s default chunking strategy (known as “sen‐
2.
tence chunking”).
3. Vectara’s Boomerang embedding model was applied to each chunk, resulting in
3.
vector embeddings. Those were stored in Vectara’s internal vector database. The
text of each chunk (with metadata if available) was stored in a separate text
database (part of the Vectara RAG stack) alongside the vector embedding.
This process illustrates the platform’s abstraction: all the complexity of text extraction,
multimodal processing, chunking, embedding, and management of the vector store is
handled by the platform. The goal of this approach, common to RAG platforms, is to
provide a consistent developer experience via the API, regardless of scale.
With file upload, you can choose additional capabilities with optional arguments, for
example:
• Selecting a chunking strategy to apply to the file: sentence or fixed chunking.
•
Example RAG Platform: Vectara 
| 
149
• Enabling table extraction or image extraction on the file, which ensures tables or
•
images embedded in the uploaded document are properly handled in the RAG
pipeline.
• Attaching metadata fields to the document. For example, in a PDF document,
•
you might want to attach the author name or creation date as metadata fields.
This ability to customize your ingestion process via API arguments exemplifies what
we would see throughout any RAG platform: lots of capabilities already exist in the
platform, and you choose which one you want to use by configuring the API call
parameters; this is in contrast to DIY, where you have to build and maintain every
capability yourself.
Direct data ingestion
In addition to file upload, you can also ingest text data directly into Vectara. This is
useful for data that does not originate in individual files, and instead comes from a
database, or other sources like Notion, Jira, Confluence, Salesforce, or Slack.
Here’s an example of how you can ingest text directly to Vectara:
import requests
import json
import os
corpus_key = "RAGBOOK"
api_key = os.getenv("VECTARA_API_KEY")
url = f"https://api.vectara.io/v2/corpora/{corpus_key}/documents"
payload = json.dumps({
  "id": "selected-works-of-shakespeare",
  "type": "structured",
  "title": "William Shakespeare, Greatest Hits",
  "metadata": {
    "timespan": "26 April 1564---23 April 1616",
    "stars": 5,
    "author": "William Shakespeare"
  },
  "sections": [
    {
      "title": "King Lear",
      "text": """Synopsis: King Lear, intending to divide his power and kingdom
      among his three daughters, demands public professions of their love. His 
      youngest daughter, ...""",
      "sections": [
        {
          "title": "Act I",
          "text": """KENT: I thought the king had more affected the Duke of 
          Albany than Cornwall.\nGLOUCESTER: It did always seem so to us...""",
          "metadata": {
150 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
            "stage-instructions": "Enter KENT, GLOUCESTER, and EDMUND"
          }
        },
        {
          "title": "Act II",
          "text": "EDMUND: Save thee, Curan. ...",
          "metadata": {
            "stage-instructions": "Enter EDMUND, and CURAN meets him"
          }
        }
      ]
    },
    {
      "title": "Antony and Cleopatra",
      "text": """PHILO: Nay, but this dotage of our general's\nO'erflows the 
      measure: those his goodly eyes, ..."""
    }
  ]
})
headers = {
  'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  'Accept': 'application/json',
  'x-api-key': api_key
}
response = requests.request("POST", url, headers=headers, data=payload)
res = response.json()
print(res)
And the response is
{
    'id': 'selected-works-of-shakespeare',
    'metadata': {
        'timespan': '26 April 1564---23 April 1616', 'stars': 5,
        'author': 'William Shakespeare'
    }, 
    'storage_usage': {'bytes_used': 468, 'metadata_bytes_used': 1005}
}
In this example, we ingested some text from King Lear. As you can see in the code,
we added some document-level metadata, and the text itself is broken into sections.
Note how sections can also be nested, to support complex representations of text in
the data source, and that we can also add metadata to each section.
Now that we have some data in our Vectara corpus, let’s see how you can use the API
to execute queries.
Example RAG Platform: Vectara 
| 
151
Running Queries
You may recall that the query flow, described in Chapter 1, involves processing the
query through the full retrieval pipeline, which may include vector search, hybrid
search, and reranking; then you craft a prompt that includes the retrieved chunks as
context, and call the generative LLM to generate the response; and the final step is
hallucination detection and correction.
Like with data ingestion, the RAG platform API simplifies the query process, often
into a single API call. In Vectara, this looks like this:
url = f"https://api.vectara.io/v2/corpora/RAGBOOK/query"
query_str = "Are pets allowed in the office?"
payload = json.dumps({
  "query": query_str,
  "search": {
    "lexical_interpolation": 0.025,
    "offset": 0,
    "limit": 50,
    "context_configuration": {
      "sentences_before": 2,
      "sentences_after": 2
    },
    "reranker": {
      "type": "customer_reranker",
      "reranker_name": "Rerank_Multilingual_v1"
    }
  },
  "generation": {
    "max_used_search_results": 7,
    "response_language": "eng",
    "prompt_name": "vectara-summary-ext-24-05-med-omni",
    "enable_factual_consistency_score": True
  }
})
headers = {
  'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  'Accept': 'application/json',
  'x-api-key': api_key
}
response = requests.request("POST", url, headers=headers, data=payload)
res = response.json()
Search_results = res['search_results'])
print(res['summary'])
print(f"Factual Consistency Score: {res['factual_consistency_score']}")
And the output is
152 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
Pets are allowed in the office at Vectara, but with specific guidelines. Birds 
are permitted and even encouraged in the workspace, although there are 
particular rules to follow [2]. However, common household pets like cats and 
dogs are not allowed on Vectara campuses [7].
Factual Consistency Score: 0.77734375
Here, we printed as output the summary and factual consistency score (aka halluci‐
nation score). Of course, the res variable includes the full set of retrieved chunks; we
just didn’t print them here as it would take multiple pages.
Notice in the above example how, in spite of hiding a lot of the detail, the query API
does allow quite a bit of flexibility and control:
• Lexical_interpolation determines whether hybrid search is enabled, and
•
which interpolation value to use.
• A choice for which reranker to use.
•
• The choice of generation_preset_name, which determines the generative LLM
•
and prompt.
• How many search results (chunks) to send over to the generative LLM
•
(max_used_search_results).
There’s another argument we didn’t use in the example above: stream_response.
When set to true, the Vectara response would be “streaming” the generated response
instead of sending it back as a single text string. This enables the user interface for
your application to display the query response as it is generated word by word instead
of waiting for the final response and displaying it all at once.
In Chapter 3, we mentioned the ability to not only detect hallucinations but also to
correct them. In the query call above, you’ve seen how the Vectara query call returns
the factual consistency score with every response, helping you detect responses that
might be hallucinated. Next, we look at another Vectara API option for correcting
hallucinations.
Hallucination Correction
With Vectara’s correct_hallucinations API endpoint, you can correct hallucina‐
tions detected in the query flow.
Let’s see how this works:
url=f"https://api.vectara.io/v2/hallucination_correctors/correct_hallucinations"
payload = json.dumps({
  "generated_text": hallucinated_response,
  "documents": [
      {"text": r["text"]}
      for r in search_results
  ],
Example RAG Platform: Vectara 
| 
153
  "model": "vhc-large-1.0"
})
headers = {
  'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  'Accept': 'application/json',
  'x-api-key': api_key
}
response = requests.request("POST", url, headers=headers, data=payload)
res = response.json()
print(hallucinated_response)
print(res['corrected_text'])
And we get
Pets are allowed in the office at Vectara, but with specific guidelines. 
Birds are permitted and even encouraged in the workspace, but there are no rules 
to follow [2]. However, common household pets like cats and snakes are not 
allowed on the Vectara campuses [7].
Pets are allowed in the office at Vectara, but with specific guidelines. 
Birds are permitted and even encouraged in the workspace, but there are specific 
guidelines to follow. However, common household pets like cats and dogs are not 
allowed on the Vectara campuses.
As you can see, the wrong facts (“no rules” and “snakes,” highlighted in red) were
corrected properly based on the original text.
We can also display the actual corrections that led to this corrected text:
print(res['corrections'])
Resulting in
[{'original_text': 'Birds are permitted and even encouraged in the workspace, 
but there are no rules to follow [2].',
  'corrected_text': 'Birds are permitted and even encouraged in the workspace, 
  but there are specific guidelines to follow.',
  'explanation': 'The source states that birds are permitted and encouraged, but 
  also explicitly mentions that there are specific guidelines and peculiarities 
  to the policy. The response incorrectly claims there are no rules to follow, 
  which is contradicted by the source.'},
 {'original_text': 'common household pets like cats and snakes are not allowed 
 on the Vectara campuses [7].',
  'corrected_text': 'common household pets like cats and dogs are not allowed on 
  the Vectara campuses.',
  'explanation': 'The source specifies that cats and dogs are not allowed, but 
  does not mention snakes as common household pets or as being specifically 
  banned. The response adds "snakes" without support from the source.'}]
This breakdown is useful as it shows specific spans of the original text, and for each
such span the specific correction made and the explanation for that correction.
154 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
Next we look at some other Vectara API calls that you can use to retrieve the full
content of a document or its summary.
Other RAG Admin API Endpoints
Although ingest/upload and query represent the most used API endpoints, Vectara
includes many more API endpoints that are used for administration. For example:
Corpora
List all corpora, create a corpus, and delete a corpus.
Documents
List all documents; delete a document; retrieve full text or summary of a
document.
API keys
List API keys, create and delete API keys.
User management
Create a user on the account, and specify their permissions. List all users, delete a
user, and reset password for a user.
Query history
See query history and additional analytics related to the account.
For example, here is how you would list all the documents in your corpus:
url = f"https://api.vectara.io/v2/corpora/RAGBOOK/documents"
headers = {
  'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  'Accept': 'application/json',
  'x-api-key': api_key
}
response = requests.request("GET", url, headers=headers)
res = response.json()
res
Which results in
{'documents': [{'id': 'pet_policy',
   'metadata': {'Producer': 'Skia/PDF m118 Google Docs Renderer',
    'Title': 'Employee Handbook - Company Pet Policy',
    'title': 'Employee Handbook - Company Pet Policy'}},
  {'id': 'selected-works-of-shakespeare',
   'metadata': {'timespan': '26 April 1564---23 April 1616',
    'stars': 5,
    'author': 'William Shakespeare',
    'title': 'William Shakespeare, Greatest Hits'}}],
 'metadata': {'page_key': ''}}
Example RAG Platform: Vectara 
| 
155
As expected, we see two documents, one from the pet_policy.pdf document we inges‐
ted via the file upload operation, and the other that was ingested as text via the
indexing operation.
When choosing a RAG platform, it’s important to make sure similar API endpoints
exist in that platform, to enable automation of various administrative tasks. This
allows central IT to better manage multiple RAG applications, understand both
ingest and query activity, manage users as they join and leave the organization, and
automate important IT tasks across all the applications of RAG in the organization.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we discussed the pros and cons of a RAG platform as compared to
taking a DIY approach. You’ve seen that DIY RAG provides the most flexibility and
control, but at a cost of time and effort, not only for the initial implementation but
also for ongoing maintenance, upgrades, and DevOps support, as well as direct cost
incurred by the various vendors. If you choose to go with DIY RAG, it’s valuable to
consider this total cost of ownership.
If you have more than one RAG application, the DIY approach can also lead to RAG
sprawl, resulting in additional costs and duplicate efforts. RAG platforms continue to
evolve as an alternative due to their appeal in terms of preventing RAG sprawl, and
enabling organizations to enjoy a central platform for all of their RAG applications.
This is not unlike the database world—nowadays, very few people, if any, are building
their own dedicated database systems. Instead, they partner with a database vendor
like Oracle, Microsoft, Databricks, or Snowflake, focusing on the application layer
that uses the database and paying the database license fees to the providers so they
can deal with that complexity. This specialization allows development teams to focus
on their core business logic—the applications that create unique value—rather than
reinventing the deep, complex engineering of a database query optimizer. A similar
specialization is now emerging in RAG, allowing teams to build powerful RAG
applications without having to first become experts in hosting LLMs, vector search,
reranking, chunking strategies, multimodal data processing, and embedding models.
Whether you build a DIY RAG stack or use a RAG platform, one of the most
important things is measuring the quality of retrieval and LLM responses—not only
at your initial launch but over time. In the next chapter, we are going to discuss this
important problem of RAG evaluation.
156 
| 
Chapter 5: The RAG Platform
CHAPTER 6
Evaluating Your RAG Application
Whether you build your RAG on your own (DIY) or use a RAG platform, you need
to be able to measure the quality of responses that users see when they use your RAG
application. This is known as RAG evaluation, which measures how accurately the
system finds the right documents or chunks (retrieval accuracy) and how coherently
and correctly it crafts its response from those documents or chunks (generation
accuracy).
Before we jump into the details, it is helpful to distinguish between the two types of
RAG evaluation:
Offline evaluation
Performed during the development cycle. These are deep, often resource-heavy
evaluations used to optimize your pipeline settings before deployment.
Online evaluation
Performed on live traffic. This identifies how real users interact with the system
but requires a lightweight approach to maintain a low-latency user experience.
In this chapter, we focus primarily on offline RAG evaluation, discussing why it’s
important, which metrics you should consider, and how to interpret each metric.
Then, in “Online RAG Evaluation” on page 186, we briefly discuss online evaluation
and provide some best practices.
How Does RAG Fail?
Not having a systematic approach to measuring the quality of your RAG application
is not just a technical oversight; it’s a business risk that can undermine your entire
AI strategy. Without a structured, rigorous evaluation framework for RAG, you risk
157
