2 To illustrate the power of interconnected data, we encourage you to look at Wikidata Query Service, which
demonstrates how KGs work. Wikidata is a massive, collaborative knowledge graph that serves as the
structured backbone for Wikipedia, storing millions of entities as “nodes” and their relationships as “edges.”
about grapefruit juice interactions, but not necessarily a single chunk covering
both. In this scenario, your RAG system will only return an accurate answer if
one of those returned chunks happens to discuss both.
Chained or multi-hop reasoning
Vector search handles topical similarity, but it does not follow a step-by-step
chain of relationships.
For the query “Who is the lead actor in the 2014 movie directed by the person
who also directed Inception?”, a vector search might return chunks about Incep‐
tion, which may include mentions of Christopher Nolan or his filmography, but
the LLM may fail to reliably connect those dots into something like “Christopher
Nolan → Interstellar → Matthew McConaughey.”
It is worth noting that an AI agent may be capable of fully addressing these scenarios,
as we discussed in Chapter 7, by carefully breaking down queries into subqueries and
using tools iteratively. Nevertheless, in this chapter, we want to explore the following:
is there a way to improve the accuracy of retrieval in RAG without relying on AI
agents?
It turns out that knowledge graphs (KGs) can be a valuable tool to handle these types
of queries, and the production complexity of building and deploying KGs is justified
when these types of complex queries are common and their failure to provide a
high-quality response materially affects business outcomes.
Let’s dive into knowledge graphs to understand what they are all about, and how to
integrate them into your RAG workflow.
Knowledge Graphs: An Overview
A knowledge graph is a network of interconnected entities that encodes factual
knowledge in a machine-readable form.2 To illustrate how KGs operate in practice,
we will use the IMDb dataset, which provides structured data about movies, TV
shows, video games, and the people involved in them, each identified by a unique
IMDb ID.
The core components of a KG are nodes and edges:
Nodes (or entities)
Nodes in a graph represent real-world entities like objects, people, places, or con‐
cepts. In the case of IMDb, the nodes include Movie, Person, Genre, Character,
280 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
and so on. Nodes often have properties that provide additional information about
each node. For example, a Movie node can have properties like release year.
Edges (or relationships)
These are the connections between nodes, defining how they relate to one
another. In the IMDb case, graph edges can be ACTED_IN, DIRECTED, HAS_GENRE,
BELONGS_TO, APPEARS_IN, or MENTIONS.
Let’s look at a simple example of a knowledge graph that describes nodes and rela‐
tionships related to movies (Figure 9-1).
Figure 9-1. Example of a knowledge graph for movies
Here we have two types of nodes: Person (left-hand boxes) and Movie (right-hand
boxes), and two types of edges: ACTED_IN and DIRECTED.
Querying a KG is not about finding similarity, like in the case of vector search.
Instead, it’s about traversing a path of known facts or entities. For example, to answer
our multi-hop question (“Who is the lead actor in the 2014 movie directed by the
person who also directed Inception?”), we might perform a structured query: find
the node Inception; traverse the DIRECTED edge to find Christopher Nolan, then
Knowledge Graphs: An Overview 
| 
281
traverse all DIRECTED edges originating from him to find his other movies, and keep
on those movies from 2014; then finally follow the ACTED_IN edge from each of those
movie nodes to identify the lead actors.
Learning from this simple example, it’s easy to understand why searching nodes can
provide precise results and address questions that might be hard for semantic search
to fulfill.
How Do You Search a Knowledge Graph?
A graph database is a specialized type of NoSQL database that stores data in a graph-
like structure, emphasizing the relationships between data points. Unlike traditional
relational databases that use tables with rows and columns, a graph database uses
nodes and edges to represent graph data and is designed for efficient execution of
graph queries.
Some of the most prominent examples of graph databases include Neo4j, Amazon
Neptune, Kuzu, and TigerGraph. To interact with and retrieve information from a
graph database, you use a graph query language like Cypher or SPARQL. These
specialized languages are designed to efficiently navigate the web of nodes and edges,
allowing you to ask complex questions about the relationships within your data.
Cypher
Cypher, originally developed for the Neo4j database, is known for its intuitive and
highly readable syntax that visually resembles the graph structure itself.
In Cypher, nodes are represented by parentheses: (), and edges (relationships) are
represented by square brackets: []. Let’s look at a simple pattern. To find a person who
directed a movie, you can write
(p:Person)-[:DIRECTED]->(m:Movie)
Where
• (p:Person) selects all nodes labeled Person. We’ve given it a variable name, p.
•
• (m:Movie) selects all nodes labeled “Movie”. We’ve given it a variable name, m.
•
• [:DIRECTED]describes the edge, specifying that the relationship type is
•
DIRECTED.
• -> indicates the direction of the relationship—the person directed the movie.
•
To turn this into a full query that retrieves the names of people who directed the
movie Oppenheimer, this becomes
282 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
MATCH (p:Person)-[:DIRECTED]->(m:Movie)
WHERE m.title = 'Oppenheimer'
RETURN p.name
This query tells the database to MATCH the specified pattern, filter it WHERE the movie’s
title is Oppenheimer, and then RETURN the name property of the person node it found.
In our simple graph example, this query returns “Christopher Nolan.”
SPARQL
SPARQL serves as the standardized query language for Resource Description Frame‐
work (RDF) triple stores, a specialized type of knowledge graph. It uses a declarative
pattern-matching syntax, to query triples, which are the three-part statements that
comprise the graph:
• The subject is the resource being described.
•
• The predicate is the property or relationship.
•
• The object is the value or related resource.
•
For example, the same query to find the director of Oppenheimer would look like this
in SPARQL:
SELECT ?personName
WHERE {
  ?movie :title "Oppenheimer" .
  ?person :directed ?movie .
  ?person :name ?personName .
}
Here, in our SPARQL query, ?person, ?movie, and ?personName are variables. Each
line in the WHERE clause is a triple pattern that the database must match. For exam‐
ple, ?movie :title "Oppenheimer" tells SPARQL that we want to match a triplet
with any movie whose title is “Oppenheimer”.
While less visually appealing than Cypher, SPARQL is a powerful World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C) standard for querying linked data in a graph, designed to let you
specify exactly what data you need. It’s about shaping and optimizing data delivery,
and less about exploring graph theory.
In practice, though, you can use both to achieve similar results—it really depends on
what your graph database provides and what you are comfortable with. In the rest of
this chapter, we provide examples in Cypher, although we could easily use SPARQL
instead—this is not an indication of preference for one or the other. To learn more
about graph databases and graph query languages, you can check other books that
cover the topic in full detail, such as O’Reilly’s Building Knowledge Graphs.
Knowledge Graphs: An Overview 
| 
283
Ontologies Versus Schemas
In the world of knowledge graphs, you will often hear the terms ontology and schema.
While they are closely related, they serve different purposes in the design of your
system.
An ontology is the formal, abstract model of your domain that defines the “rules
of reality” for your knowledge graph. It doesn’t care about specific data points (like
Christopher Nolan); instead, it defines the categories and the logical constraints of
how those categories interact. For example, in the movie domain, the ontology
dictates that “A Person can DIRECT a Movie” but “A Movie cannot DIRECT a Person,” it
defines that Movies must have a Release Year, and so on.
A schema is the database-level implementation of that ontology. It is the specific set
of labels, relationship types, and data constraints you apply to your graph database so
that the system knows how to store and index the data. For example, if the ontology
says movies have a release year, the schema defines that the Movie node in the DB will
have a property called release_year, stored as an Integer.
As we’ll see in the next section, when used with RAG, your ontology helps the LLM
understand the logic of your data (e.g., “To find a director’s actors, I must traverse
through the Movie nodes”), whereas the schema is what you provide to the LLM
(often as a text description) so it can generate the correct Cypher or SPARQL code to
fetch that data when issuing a graph database query.
Now that we have a basic understanding of how a knowledge graph is stored in a
graph database and how you can query a graph using a graph query language, let’s see
how to integrate KGs into RAG.
Using Knowledge Graphs in RAG
To demonstrate how a KG can be used in RAG, we’ll expand on our example from the
world of movies, and build a knowledge graph about movies using two complemen‐
tary data sources:
• IMDb (here we used the non-commercial IMDb datasets), which we mentioned
•
earlier, provides the base set of nodes and relationships: the verified “who, what,
when” of cinema. We will create nodes like Movie, Person, Character, and Genre,
with node properties like a movie’s release year, or a person’s role.
• Movie scripts from the MovieSum dataset on Hugging Face include dialogue
•
and scene descriptions. We will split these movie scripts into text chunks and
populate the Chunk nodes.
284 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Let’s see how we build this specific knowledge graph from the IMDb and MovieSum
datasets step by step. Later on in “Building Knowledge Graphs” on page 293, we will
discuss the more general approach to building KGs.
Building a Knowledge Graph for Movies
To get started, we first need to install Neo4j and set up an account with a username
and password (again, here, any type of graph database would be fine).
The next step is processing the movie scripts themselves. For each script, we first
clean up the text from XML tags and then use LangChain to break each script into
chunks as follows:
    text_splitter = RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(
        chunk_size=CHUNK_SIZE,
        chunk_overlap=CHUNK_OVERLAP,
        length_function=len,
        is_separator_regex=False,
    )
    cleaned_script = re.sub(r'<[^>]+>', ' ', script_content)
    cleaned_script = re.sub(r'\s+', ' ', cleaned_script).strip()
    chunks = text_splitter.split_text(cleaned_script)
Before adding these chunks to the graph as Chunk nodes, we use a form of named-
entity recognition (NER) to identify the Character entities in the script. Fortunately,
movie scripts have a common structure, where the character’s name is in uppercase
letters, which makes it relatively easy to identify them in the script, using regular
expressions such as the following:
# Pattern 1: Lines that start with character names (all caps, followed by colon 
or newline)
# Example: "JOHN:", "MARY\n"
char_pattern1 = re.findall(
r'^([A-Z][A-Z\s]{2,20}?)(?::|$)', script_text, re.MULTILINE
)
characters.update(
[name.strip() for name in char_pattern1 if len(name.strip()) > 2]
)
    
# Pattern 2: Character names in parentheses
# Example: "(JOHN enters)", "(MARY speaking)"
char_pattern2 = re.findall(
r'\(([A-Z][A-Z\s]{2,15}?)(?:\s+[a-z]|\))', script_text
)
characters.update(
[name.strip() for name in char_pattern2 if len(name.strip()) > 2]
)
Using Knowledge Graphs in RAG 
| 
285
Using these regular expressions, some extracted character names are incorrect, so we
add (see full Jupyter notebook) some more ad hoc parsing logic to make it more
robust:
1. Any valid character name needs to appear at least three times in the script
1.
2. Remove some common words that can be mistakenly identified as character
2.
names like THE, AND, WITH, HIM, and so on.
This speaks to the fact that building (and maintaining) knowledge graphs is a difficult
task that requires domain expertise. Unlike movie scripts, which offer predictable
formatting and clear cues like all-caps character names, enterprise data—such as
customer contracts, support tickets, and system logs—is often messy and contains
inconsistent formatting. Bridging this gap between clean, structured examples and
the ambiguity of real-world data is why KG construction remains a high-effort
undertaking, a topic we will cover in more detail in “Building Knowledge Graphs” on
page 293).
Continuing with our example, the last step is to build the relationships in the graph.
In this case, we will link Chunk nodes to Movie nodes and Character nodes.
Here is an example chunk from the movie GoldenEye:
a sidearm -- watches the needle flutter behind her. Kolkhaznha’s manner is friendly,
avuncular, • and well-trained -- clearly designed to put Marina at ease • KOL‐
KHAZHNA (switches to English) Do you speak English fluently? MARINA Yes KOL‐
KHAZHNA Did you speak in English with the other prisoner while being transported
here? MARINA Yes -- but -- KOLKHAZHNA (friendly) Just answer yes or no --
this is only a preliminary debriefing. General Pushkin will arrive soon for more
thorough questioning. (presses on) Do you have any prior relationship with the other
prisoner? MARINA (decisively) ON THE NEEDLE it flutters widely across the scroll‐
ing paper -- • KOLKHAZHNA looks intrigued as his assistant shakes EXT. WIDE ON
URAL MOUNTAINS - A MILITARY ATTACK HELICOPTER his head. Meanwhile
approaches quickly, flying high over the range -- as -- INSIDE THE GUEST ROOM-
BOND has dragged the fireplace screen over and yanked a wire out to pick the lock of
the handcuffs, but it’s a very awkward task -- INSIDE THE SALON- KOLKHAZHNA
We can see there are a few characters mentioned here: KOLKHAZHNA, MARINA,
and BOND. For each of the characters mentioned in this chunk, we can add the
following relationships into the graph structure:
(Chunk)-[:MENTIONS]->(Character)
(Character)-[:APPEARS_IN]->(Movie)
That’s it for the MovieSum dataset. We now turn to the IMDb dataset, which has
additional useful information about movies, and populate additional nodes like Per
son, Movie, Character, and Genre, and add relationships like the following:
286 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
(Person)-[:DIRECTED]->(Movie)
(Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->(Movie)
(Movie)-[:HAS_GENRE]->(Genre)
(Character)-[:PORTRAYED_BY]->(Person)
Great, now we have what we need: a knowledge graph that integrates chunks and
metadata from the movie scripts with additional information and relationships from
IMDb. You can see the full code for building this KG in the “create-graph.ipynb”
notebook.
Now let’s see how we can use this graph in RAG.
Using the Knowledge Graph at Query Time
Once the KG is populated with nodes and relationships, we can integrate it into the
RAG query flow using one of these common usage patterns: chunk enrichment or
graph-hybrid retrieval.
Chunk enrichment
With this approach, the retrieval process begins with a standard vector search to find
the chunks of text that are most semantically relevant to the user’s query. However,
raw chunk text often contains “thin” references—misspelled names or pronouns like
“he”—that lack the full context needed for an LLM to provide a factual answer.
We use the KG to dynamically enrich these chunks, by performing a graph look-up on
the entities found within the text. For example, consider the following query: “Which
actor said, ‘They call it a Royale with Cheese,’ and what movie was this in?”
First, we use standard vector search to find the chunk that contains the “Royale with
Cheese” text. For example, it might retrieve the following chunk as the top match:
for this to search you. Searching you is a right that the cops in Amsterdam do n’t have.
JULES That did it, man - I’m f#%kin’ goin', that’s all there is to it. VINCENT You’ll
dig it the most. But you know what the funniest thing about Europe is? JULES What?
VINCENT It’s the little differences. A lotta the same shit we got here, they got there,
but there they’re a little different. JULES Examples? VINCENT Well, in Amsterdam,
you can buy beer in a movie theatre. And I do n’t mean in a paper cup either. They give
you a glass of beer, like in a bar. In Paris, you can buy beer at MacDonald’s. Also, you
know what they call a Quarter Pounder with Cheese in Paris? JULES They do n’t call
it a Quarter Pounder with Cheese? VINCENT No, they got the metric system there,
they would n’t know what the f#%k a Quarter Pounder is. JULES What’d they call it?
VINCENT Royale with Cheese. JULES ( repeating . ) Royale with Cheese. What’d they
call a Big Mac? VINCENT Big Mac’s a Big Mac, but they call it Le Big Mac. JULES
What do
Using Knowledge Graphs in RAG 
| 
287
The vector search was successful—it found the exact line of dialogue. However,
looking at the raw text, this is not enough to answer the user’s question—it doesn’t
include the movie name, and it doesn’t name the actor, just the character (Vincent).
The retrieved chunk above looks messy, combining character
names with text, having some typos like “do n’t” (extra space), but
note that it is the exact chunk as extracted using the code in the
example notebook from the MovieSum and IMDb datasets.
An LLM receiving only this text will have a hard time answering this question, due to
the missing information (movie name and actor name).
The graph enrichment step can identify the entity Character: Vincent in the chunk
text and use the KG to obtain additional context that is not in the text:
1. Character: Vincent -> IS_REAL_NAME: Vincent Vega
1.
2. Character: Vincent -> PLAYED_BY Actor: John Travolta
2.
3. Character: Vincent -> APPEARS_IN Movie: Pulp Fiction
3.
Instead of just sending the raw chunk text to the LLM, we send the chunk plus a
knowledge context packet that includes this additional information, allowing the LLM
to answer with 100% certainty, transforming a vague snippet into a data-rich fact.
This flow is illustrated in Figure 9-2.
Figure 9-2. Chunk enrichment workflow: the initial chunks that are retrieved from the
vector DB are then enriched using the Graph DB, before being sent over to the generative
LLM step
288 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Chunk enrichment highlights the strength of the KG as a high-fidelity “context
provider” that annotates and adds structure or metadata to the results of your vector-
based RAG retrieval system.
Hybrid-graph retrieval
In this approach, we first ask an LLM to convert a user’s natural language question
directly into a formal graph query language, like Cypher or SPARQL, that the graph
database can execute, with the intent of extracting relevant chunks from the graph
and combining them with the chunks retrieved from vector-based retrieval.
For this to succeed, the LLM must first be given the graph’s schema, a blue‐
print of the available node labels (e.g., Person, Movie, Chunk), relationship types
(e.g., :DIRECTED, :ACTED_IN), and properties. This schema provides the LLM with
the “vocabulary” and “grammar” it needs to write a valid graph query.
As an example, consider this question: “What are all the characters in GoldenEye?
Which of them interacted with Bond?”
Armed with the schema, the LLM can translate this into a Cypher query:
// Step 1: Find all characters in GoldenEye
MATCH (m:Movie)
WHERE toLower(m.title) CONTAINS 'goldeneye'
WITH m
MATCH (c:Character)-[:APPEARS_IN]->(m)
WITH m, collect(DISTINCT c.name) AS all_characters, m.title AS movie_title
// Step 2: Find characters that interacted with Bond (i.e., co-mentioned in a 
chunk)
MATCH (m2:Movie)
WHERE toLower(m2.title) CONTAINS 'goldeneye'
MATCH (ch:Chunk)-[:BELONGS_TO]->(m2)
// Find chunks mentioning Bond (fuzzy match: 'bond')
MATCH (ch)-[:MENTIONS]->(bond_char:Character)
WHERE toLower(bond_char.name) CONTAINS 'bond'
// Find other characters mentioned in the same chunk
MATCH (ch)-[:MENTIONS]->(other_char:Character)
WHERE other_char <> bond_char
WITH movie_title, all_characters, collect(DISTINCT other_char.name) AS 
interacted_with_bond, collect(DISTINCT ch.text)[0..10] AS chunks
RETURN movie_title, all_characters, interacted_with_bond, chunks
Executing this Cypher query against the graph database, we retrieve relevant chunks
and can send them directly to the generative LLM in your RAG pipeline.
If we simply use the chunks from the vector search, we don’t have enough informa‐
tion, and the RAG responds with “I cannot answer this question.” However, by
combining the chunks from the vector search with those from the graph DB and
sending both to the generative LLM in your RAG pipeline, as shown in Figure 9-3, we
get a better response:
Using Knowledge Graphs in RAG 
| 
289
Based on the provided context, the following characters appear in GoldenEye:
**Characters in GoldenEye:**
- James Bond
- Marina
- Trevelyan
- Savatier
- Morley
- Kolkhazna (Kolkhazna's dead assistant is mentioned)
- Romaly
- Valentin
- Elliot Harmsway
- Technicians (in the control center)
- Guards
- Militiamen
- Bartender
- Gunner (on the helicopter)
- Jordan (killed by Xenia)
- Xenia
**Characters who interacted with Bond:**
- Marina (multiple scenes, including romantic and action sequences)
- Trevelyan (direct confrontation and dialogue)
- Savatier (physical fight with Bond)
- Morley (present in action scenes with Bond)
- Romaly (Bond gives instructions to Romaly)
- Valentin (dialogue at the bar)
- Elliot Harmsway (introduction and dialogue)
- Bartender (serves Bond a drink)
- Militiamen (chase Bond)
- Guards (involved in action sequences with Bond)
- Gunner (shoots at Bond and Marina)
- Xenia (antagonist, interacts through conflict)
- Technicians (indirectly, as Bond's actions affect them)
**Characters mentioned but with unclear or no direct interaction with Bond:**
- Kolkhazna's dead assistant
- Jordan (killed by Xenia, no direct interaction with Bond in the provided 
  context)
**Summary:**  
The main characters who interacted with Bond in GoldenEye, according to the 
context, are: Marina, Trevelyan, Savatier, Morley, Romaly, Valentin, Elliot 
Harmsway, Bartender, Militiamen, Guards, Gunner, and Xenia.
290 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Figure 9-3. Graph query generation in a RAG pipeline
By combining the conceptual understanding of semantic (vector) search with the
factual precision of KGs, you enable your RAG application to answer a much broader
range of questions with higher accuracy than either approach could achieve alone.
For example, HippoRAG, a graph-augmented RAG framework that combines LLMs
with a KG, yields up to ~20% higher accuracy on multi-hop question-answering
benchmarks compared to standard RAG baselines.
You can see the full code for this combined approach in the GitHub repo, where we
use LangChain to build a local RAG system (with Chroma as the vector database),
which combines chunks from vector search with those identified by the graph query
(after automated translation to Cypher).
Choosing Between Enrichment and Hybrid Retrieval
While both chunk enrichment and hybrid graph retrieval leverage the power of a
knowledge graph for RAG, they solve different problems and carry distinct opera‐
tional costs.
Chunk enrichment is a “metadata-first” strategy. It assumes your vector search is
already effective at finding relevant text, but that the text itself is missing broader
context. This is the ideal choice when queries are semantic (like asking about a spe‐
cific line from a movie), but the answer requires external facts (like an actor’s name)
not present in the snippet. Because this involves a simple indexed lookup of the
retrieved chunk’s ID, it adds negligible latency and is highly reliable in production.
Hybrid-graph retrieval, by contrast, is a “discovery-first” strategy. It excels when the
user’s query is structural or relational, requiring the system to traverse connections
Using Knowledge Graphs in RAG 
| 
291
that a vector search would miss (e.g., “Find all characters who interacted with Bond
in more than three scenes”). However, this power comes with nontrivial production
complexity. You must manage a “text-to-Cypher” pipeline where an LLM translates
natural language into a database query. This also introduces additional risks, such as
when the LLM hallucinates invalid syntax, and to run this safely, you need to consider
query timeouts and implement retry strategies to handle failures.
The main differences are listed in Table 9-1.
Table 9-1. Comparing chunk enrichment to hybrid-graph retrieval for RAG in production
Feature
Chunk enrichment
Hybrid-graph retrieval
Primary goal
Contextualizing a specific text snippet
Finding relationships/aggregations
Ideal for
Factual grounding (dates, names, IDs)
Multi-hop reasoning (who met whom?)
Runtime risk
Low: simple indexed lookup
Higher: query hallucinations or slow joins
Latency
Minimal (submillisecond lookup)
Variable (depends on LLM and query complexity)
Implementation Straightforward; great for minimal viable
product
Complex; requires “text-to-Cypher” or “text-to-
SPARQL” tuning
Regardless of the pattern you use for integrating KGs with RAG, the success of a
KG depends on your data engineering maturity. In production, you will face entity
explosion, when a single entity may be mapped into multiple nodes. For example,
your extraction pipeline might create three different nodes for “007,” “James Bond,”
and “Bond,” instead of merging those into a single node.
As we discuss later in “Building Knowledge Graphs” on page 293, building and
maintaining a high-fidelity KG is a significant “offline” engineering effort that must
be weighed against the benefits of using a KG to enhance query accuracy. Most com‐
monly, your evals (see Chapter 6) can provide great input for making this decision: by
analyzing the quality of your query responses, you can see which kinds of queries fail
and whether a KG can help make them succeed.
If you are just starting, chunk enrichment often offers the “best bang for your buck,”
providing immediate factual grounding with low risk. As your use cases evolve
toward complex reasoning and cross-document aggregations, the investment in a
hybrid-graph pipeline might become necessary to break through the limitations of
similarity-based retrieval.
Another important decision when implementing the patterns above in production
is where your vector embeddings will reside, a choice that impacts your system’s con‐
sistency, latency, and operational overhead. Since modern graph databases support
native vector indexes, you can just store the vector embedding directly in each chunk
node with the property chunk.embedding. With this approach, your retrieval flow
can perform a semantic search and a graph traversal in a single database transaction.
This provides atomic consistency, and provides a single source of truth for the
292 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
embeddings. However, you now depend on the vector DB processing of embedding,
which may compete with complex graph traversals for RAM, potentially leading to
performance bottlenecks in very large datasets.
The other option is to maintain the standard RAG retrieval flow, and store the
embeddings in the vector DB. Once a chunk is retrieved, the system uses its chunk_id
to perform a lookup in the graph DB for enrichment or further traversal. This
approach allows you to maintain your high-performance retrieval pipeline (which
includes vector search, but might also incorporate hybrid search and/or reranking)
independently of your graph traversals (to support high-depth logic). However, you
are now responsible for ensuring the vector DB and graph DB are fully synchronized,
avoiding a situation where your RAG flow retrieves a chunk from the vector store
that no longer exists in the graph, causing an application error.
We’ve seen why KGs are helpful for some complex queries and two common patterns
of integrating them into RAG. It turns out, however, that one of the main challenges
in using KGs with RAG is the task of building and maintaining these knowledge
graphs, which we cover next.
Building Knowledge Graphs
We’ve seen how to build a knowledge graph from IMDb and the MovieSum datasets
in “Building a Knowledge Graph for Movies” on page 285. As a reminder, the general
approach is as follows:
1. Design the graph schema: we decided to include nodes for Person, Movie, Charac
1.
ter, Genre, and Chunk, and relationships such as ACTED_IN, PORTRAYED_BY, and
DIRECTED.
2. We then used some custom pre-processing of both the IMDb and MovieSum
2.
datasets to populate the graph itself.
For the movie scripts, we were able to automate part of this process, by identifying
character names in the script, because character names in movie scripts are relatively
easy to identify. But even with this simplification, we had to do some manual process‐
ing to remove words that were misidentified as character names (like “her” or “his”).
The IMDb dataset was created and sanitized for us already, so creating a graph from
that dataset was relatively easy—the creators of that dataset did all the hard work for us.
While our experience with movie scripts required manual intervention, it still rep‐
resents the best-case scenario for data extraction. Building a KG from internal cor‐
porate data means navigating a labyrinth of unstructured “dark data,” inconsistent
schemas, and siloed legacy systems. If cleaning a few movie scripts felt tedious, imag‐
ine performing that same process across millions of fragmented PDF files, spread‐
sheets, emails, and private data, where domain expertise is absolutely necessary.
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
293
Automating Knowledge Graph Construction
While manually curating a knowledge graph can produce clean, accurate results,
this expert-driven approach is labor-intensive and can quickly become a significant
bottleneck. In fact, constructing KGs rarely scales to meet the demands of modern
enterprise applications, especially for dynamic RAG and agentic systems that must
process a constant velocity of new, unstructured information.
Instead, it is becoming more common to use an automated approach to build the
graph from text, by following these three steps:
1. Find the key “things” (entity identification): scan the text to find and categorize
1.
important nouns. For example, identify “Apple” as an “organization” and “Steve
Jobs” as a “person.” These things become the nodes in our graph.
2. Find the connections (relation extraction): analyze the sentences to figure out
2.
how these things are related. The processing might see the sentence “Apple was
founded by Steve Jobs” and create a connection, or link, represented as (Apple,
FOUNDED_BY, Steve Jobs).
3. Clean up duplicates (entity linking): finally, the system cleans up the data by
3.
making sure different names for the same thing all point to one single entry or
node. For instance, it learns that “Apple,” “Apple Inc.,” and “the company that
makes iPhones” are all the same entity. This ensures the graph is accurate and not
full of duplicates.
This whole process effectively turns a messy sea of text into a clean, organized
network of interconnected facts.
Using LLMs, these steps can be dramatically streamlined. Instead of using separate,
specialized, old-school NLP models for each task, a single, powerful LLM can
be prompted to read a document and directly output a set of structured entity–
relationship triples. This approach simplifies the engineering complexity and often
improves results due to the LLM’s vast world knowledge and nuanced understanding
of context.
But while LLMs can dramatically streamline this step, it is important to tem‐
per expectations: purely LLM-driven triple extraction is still noisy and domain-
dependent. In a production environment, an LLM-only pipeline is often just the
starting point for bootstrapping a graph, and to achieve the high fidelity required for
business outcomes, most teams implement a hybrid extraction strategy. This involves
using the LLM to propose entities and relations, which are then passed through a
layer of deterministic heuristics (e.g., regular expressions for IDs or dates), classical
NLP models for validation, and a human-in-the-loop interface for expert quality
assurance on critical entities.
294 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Furthermore, when we use an LLM, a key challenge remains: entity linking.
Real-world enterprise data is messy and inconsistent, and a single real-world “thing”
can be referenced by many different names or identifiers. The same “one-thing-
many-names” problem occurs with almost any entity in an enterprise knowledge
graph. Here are some more examples:
Company entities in financial services
A single corporate entity might appear in news articles, regulatory filings, and
internal reports as “IBM Inc.,” “International Business Machines Corp.,” “I.B.M.,”
or even just “IBM.”
Drug components in pharmaceuticals
A single drug is frequently referred to by its brand name (e.g., “Tylenol”), its
generic/active ingredient name (e.g., “acetaminophen”), and its formal chemical
name (e.g., “N-acetyl-para-aminophenol”).
Products in supply chains and ecommerce
A single product, like an “iPhone 15 Pro 256GB,” may be listed by different ven‐
dors or in different systems as “Apple iPhone 15 Pro (256)” or “IP15PRO-256-
BLK.”
To effectively tackle entity linking, we need to start by defining a clear ontology, which
defines the “things” that exist in your domain (the classes or types of entities, like
“person,” “company,” or “drug”), as well as the properties and relationships they can
have.
In the context of entity linking, the ontology provides the basic structure needed to
solve the “one-thing-many-names” problem. For instance, it might define a company
entity as having one canonical name (e.g., “International Business Machines Corp.”)
but also a list of aliases (e.g., “IBM,” “I.B.M.”). When the system later encounters
“IBM Inc.,” it knows its task is not to create a new node, but to recognize it as an alias
and link it to the existing canonical company node, filling in the appropriate property
as defined by the schema.
With the ontology as the target structure in hand, the entity-linking process requires
actively matching, linking, and merging entities. This is rarely a single algorithm or
approach, but rather a multi-stage pipeline that typically includes the following two
steps:
1. Normalization: raw text is cleaned and standardized (e.g., “Corp.” and “Corpora‐
1.
tion” both become “corp”; all text is lowercased).
2. Candidate generation: looking for entities that represent the same “thing,” you
2.
typically narrow down the search space in some way, so you’re not comparing
every entity to every other entity. For example, it might only compare person
entities that are similar in some manner, using techniques from simple string
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
295
3 This data point was given in conversation with an expert in building knowledge graphs with deep experience
in the field over the last few decades.
comparison (for example, Jaro–Winkler distance for “Chris” versus “Christo‐
pher”) to complex contextual and domain-specific similarity metrics.
The full entity-linking process involves an initial bootstrapping phase, where the
system runs a large-scale job over the existing data to create the initial set of canon‐
ical entities. After that, it’s common to use an incremental mode, whereby as new
unstructured data arrives, an entity-linking model’s job is to match the new surface
forms (like “Tylenol”) against the existing canonical entities in the graph (the Drug
node for “acetaminophen”).
You can also augment this process with human-in-the-loop: when the system’s con‐
fidence in a match is low (e.g., it’s 50/50 on whether “Christian” is the same as
“Christopher”), it flags the ambiguity for expert review. This focuses scarce human
effort only on the most difficult cases, allowing the system to scale while continuously
learning and improving its accuracy from the expert feedback.
Entity linking (also known in the computer science literature as record linkage) is
especially challenging at large scale and with messy data, highlighting the difficulty
inherent in automating the generation of KGs from text, even if we utilize the
immense power of LLMs.
Leveraging Standard Ontologies and Knowledge Graphs
We’ve seen that building a knowledge graph from the ground up can be a high-risk
endeavor. In fact, according to one estimate,3 over 50% of such projects fail. The
technical reason is often underestimating the complexity involved, especially around
entity linking, but another common reason is an attempt to model “everything” in the
domain rather than adopting a focused, use case-driven approach.
Standard ontologies offer a head start that can help you avoid this unnecessary pitfall.
They provide a formal, standardized structure that defines the key concepts and
relationships for a specific domain like finance or healthcare. By thinking through
your ontology, you not only save development time but also ensure your data model
is correct, consistent, and interoperable, preventing the common pitfall of building an
overly broad and unusable graph.
Several powerful, open source ontologies are publicly available. For example, in the
finance domain, we have Financial Industry Business Ontology (FIBO), developed by
the Enterprise Data Management (EDM) Council, which provides a precise vocabu‐
lary for financial concepts like Corporation, Security, and Loan. Its value lies in its
detailed, standardized properties, which are essential for accurate entity resolution.
296 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Using an ontology is helpful, as it provides you with the blueprint of the knowledge
graph, but you still have to populate it with data. Companies like Dun & Bradstreet,
Refinitiv (now LSEG), and S&P Global have invested millions of hours in the difficult
work of entity linking, and recently they have been working toward licensing this
kind of data via curated data feeds that assign canonical identifiers, like a Data Uni‐
versal Numbering System (D-U-N-S) number or a Permanent Identifier (PermID), to
uniquely identify entities and map their complex corporate hierarchies.
Similarly, in healthcare, datasets like DrugBank function as a comprehensive knowl‐
edge graph mapping the relationships among drugs as well as chemical components.
For instance, a single drug entity like atorvastatin is connected via specific relation‐
ships to its known protein targets (e.g., HMG-CoA reductase), the enzymes that
metabolize it (e.g., CYP3A4), and other drugs it interacts with.
The primary value of licensing this type of data is that it provides a high-quality,
pre-resolved core knowledge graph, saving you from the enormous effort of resolving
everything yourself. Your task is reduced to a much smaller, more manageable prob‐
lem: linking your new, messy internal data to the provider’s established, canonical
entities. This allows you to connect “IBM” or “I.B.M.” in your systems to the single
golden record for “International Business Machines Corp.”
While valuable, such licensable KGs do have their downsides: in addition to licensing
fees, you need to consider the commitment you make to using this specific form of
KG, and that all other data systems will have to conform to it.
Given the enormous complexity of building and maintaining KGs, researchers have
been looking for other ways to integrate KGs into RAG. One such approach is
Microsoft’s GraphRAG, an innovative approach of using an LLM not just to extract
atomic facts but to generate a hierarchical graph that captures information at multiple
levels of abstraction.
GraphRAG
Before diving into GraphRAG, it’s important to clarify that some AI engineers use
the term “GraphRAG” to describe any form of graph-aided RAG, like, for example,
the techniques in “Using Knowledge Graphs in RAG” on page 284. In this chapter,
however, we will use the term GraphRAG when referring to the specific approach for
using knowledge graphs for RAG introduced by Microsoft Research, and designed
to support answering sensemaking queries—broad, exploratory queries that require
synthesizing information from an entire dataset, like “What are the main themes in
all James Bond movies?”
In technical terms, this process is known as query-focused summarization (QFS),
where the goal is to generate a comprehensive answer based on a global view of the
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
297
data rather than retrieving a few specific snippets or chunks (which may or may not
capture that global view).
GraphRAG uses an LLM to build a graph automatically from the source documents.
With this graph, it then identifies clusters (communities), which are summarized, and
this process is repeated up to the top level of the graph to enable understanding of
global contexts. It works as follows:
Building a knowledge graph
Use an LLM to automatically extract key entities (like people, places, and con‐
cepts) and the relationships between them, from the unstructured text corpus,
and dynamically construct a knowledge graph. This graph isn’t based on a prede‐
fined schema but is instead a direct structural representation of the knowledge
contained within the source documents themselves, capturing how different
ideas and entities are interconnected throughout the text.
Community detection
The primary innovation of GraphRAG lies in how it utilizes this newly created
graph. Instead of just treating it as a normal knowledge graph, with GraphRAG,
you apply community detection algorithms to identify clusters of densely con‐
nected entities. These “communities” represent the core themes and semantic
topics that are in your data, and GraphRAG then leverages an LLM to generate
summaries for each of these communities at multiple hierarchical levels, from
very specific subtopics to broad, overarching themes.
Querying
When responding to a user query (the sensemaking query), the GraphRAG
query engine doesn’t search the raw text and summarize it with an LLM like in a
normal RAG pipeline. Instead, it finds the most relevant community summaries
that answer your query, and uses an LLM to generate a partial answer based on
each relevant community summary. Then, another LLM call uses all these partial
answers to formulate a final comprehensive response to the query.
Microsoft’s graphrag package is open source, so let’s see how we can use it. Applied to
the MovieSum dataset, we start by loading the data:
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
from datasets import load_dataset
moviesum_dataset = load_dataset("rohitsaxena/MovieSum")
moviesum_df = pd.DataFrame(moviesum_dataset['train'])
Since GraphRAG is quite expensive and time-consuming (GraphRAG makes a large
number of LLM calls at indexing time to process all the documents), we pick a
random set of 20 movies, so that our cost for this example is reasonable:
298 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
np.random.seed(42)
SAMPLE_SIZE = 20
indices = np.linspace(0, len(moviesum_df) - 1, SAMPLE_SIZE, dtype=int)
filtered_df = moviesum_df.iloc[indices].copy()
In the full notebook, you can find a function that estimates the cost of running
GraphRAG on these 20 movies, which comes to $6.32. For the full MovieSum dataset
of 1800 movies, the cost would be over $560. And that’s only for 1800 movies;
imagine how much the cost might be for your whole Google Drive or Microsoft
SharePoint account? We will discuss this cost aspect a bit later in this chapter.
The next step is to define a settings.yaml file that defines how GraphRAG is going to
work, including the LLM to use, chunk size, graph entities, and additional configura‐
tion parameters.
Once the settings are defined, running GraphRAG boils down to a simple call to
functions in the GraphRAG library. First we prepare the documents in the format
GraphRAG expects them:
from datetime import datetime
input_docs = []
current_date = datetime.now()
for idx, row in filtered_df.iterrows():
    input_docs.append({
        'id': row['imdb_id'],
        'title': row['movie_name'],
        'text': row['script'],
        'creation_date': current_date
    })
input_df = pd.DataFrame(input_docs)
And then, we run the build_index process:
from graphrag.api import build_index
from graphrag.config.load_config import load_config
GRAPHRAG_DIR = Path("./graphrag_workspace")
config = load_config(root_dir=GRAPHRAG_DIR)
results = await build_index(
    config=config,
    input_documents=input_df,
    verbose=True
)
This might take a while. And we mean a while—on a decent M4 Mac laptop, for only
20 movies, it took about 45 minutes. This is because GraphRAG indexing is not a
simple one-pass process. The system must make dozens of sequential LLM calls for
every single text chunk: first to extract entities and claims, then to resolve and merge
those entities, and finally to generate multiple layers of hierarchical community
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
299
summaries. Each of these steps is computationally expensive and relies on the LLM’s
reasoning speed, creating a large cumulative latency even for modest datasets (20
movies in our case).
GraphRAG generates an output folder, where various Parquet files are generated with
the outputs of the build_index process.
To run a query in GraphRAG, we first load these datasets into pandas DataFrames:
from graphrag.config.load_config import load_config
config = load_config(root_dir=GRAPHRAG_DIR)
entities_df = pd.read_parquet(OUTPUT_DIR / "entities.parquet")
relationships_df = pd.read_parquet(OUTPUT_DIR / "relationships.parquet")
communities_df = pd.read_parquet(OUTPUT_DIR / "communities.parquet")
reports_df = pd.read_parquet(OUTPUT_DIR / "community_reports.parquet")
text_units_df = pd.read_parquet(OUTPUT_DIR / "text_units.parquet")
GraphRAG defines two types of query functions:
local_search
This can be used as an exploratory, “bottom-up” method: it first identifies a
few seed nodes in the graph that closely match the query, and then “walks”
outward along their edges to discover nearby, contextually related nodes and
relationships (e.g., 1-hop or 2-hop neighbors). This approach is ideal for using
GraphRAG to answer specific, detailed questions where the necessary context is
likely contained within a localized “neighborhood” of the graph.
global_search
This employs a comprehensive, “top-down” strategy. Instead of just expanding
from seed nodes, it searches across the entire graph to identify all nodes, relation‐
ships, or even entire subcommunities that are semantically relevant to the query
concept, even if they aren’t directly connected. This method is better suited for
broad, high-level queries that require synthesizing information from multiple,
potentially disconnected parts of the graph.
As an example, if we run a global search for the query “What are the main themes
and narrative patterns across all the movie scripts?”, we get the following:
The movie scripts analyzed reveal a rich tapestry of recurring themes and 
narrative patterns that span a wide range of genres, character types, and 
settings. These themes often intertwine, creating complex stories that explore 
human emotions, supernatural elements, social dynamics, and conflict. Below is a 
comprehensive synthesis of the main themes and narrative patterns identified 
across the dataset.
---
## 1. **Conflict and Struggle**
Conflict is a pervasive and driving force in many narratives, manifesting in 
300 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
various forms:
- **Physical and Military Conflict:** Stories often depict intense battles and 
warfare, such as Conan’s confrontations with hostile tribes and empires, Vlad’s 
defense against Mehmed’s army, and the violent raids by the Turanian Horsemen. 
These conflicts emphasize themes of survival, leadership, rebellion, and the 
cost of violence [Data: Reports (177, 665, 684, 659, 554, 547, 6, 668, 699, 
+more)].
- **Personal and Social Confrontations:** Beyond warfare, narratives explore 
interpersonal conflicts including domestic violence, legal disputes, and social 
tensions. For example, the tragic relationship between Denise and Tommy 
escalates from care to violence, while Barbara and Jonathan’s turbulent marriage 
involves emotional and legal struggles [Data: Reports (239, 442, 118, 379, 943, 
980)].
- **Supernatural Battles:** Many scripts incorporate supernatural conflict, such 
as possession, hauntings, and battles with demons or fiends. The Lambert and 
Renai families face malevolent entities, blending everyday family life with 
extraordinary threats, highlighting emotional resilience amid trauma [Data: 
Reports (878, 856, 237, 235, 13, 79, 242, 881, +more)].
---
## 2. **Family and Interpersonal Relationships**
Family dynamics and close personal relationships are central to many narratives, 
often serving as emotional cores:
- **Parent-Child Bonds:** The father-son relationship between Sam and Jonah 
Baldwin exemplifies themes of grief, support, and complex family dynamics. 
Similarly, Eve’s growth within her family and community highlights nurturing and 
social bonding [Data: Reports (1, 44, 468, 374, 136)].
- **Complex Family Struggles:** Several stories explore emotional tension, love, 
conflict, and vulnerability within families, such as Jonathan Rose’s 
multifaceted household challenges and the Transylvanian family’s struggles amid 
supernatural and political threats [Data: Reports (532, 5, 566, 234, 546)].
- **Interpersonal Networks:** Friendships, mentorships, and romantic 
relationships also play significant roles, shaping character development and 
social cohesion. Examples include the artistic collaboration of Bob Wallace and 
Phil Davis, the mentorship between Rocky Balboa and Apollo Creed, and the social 
tensions in adolescent networks [Data: Reports (224, 460, 469, 934, 740, 16)].
---
## 3. **Supernatural and Paranormal Elements**
A strong narrative pattern involves supernatural phenomena, often intertwined 
with family and psychological themes:
- **Possession and Hauntings:** Families like the Lamberts and Renais confront 
possession and hauntings, with narratives exploring the psychological toll and 
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
301
protective instincts within these crises. The use of alternate realms such as 
The Further and the Black Void adds metaphysical depth [Data: Reports (878, 856, 
237, 235, 79, 242, 881, 879, 159, +more)].
- **Psychological Horror and Trauma:** Characters such as Billy embody trauma 
and psychological distress, with symbolic motifs like the dark Santa Claus 
figure representing the blurring of innocence and menace. These stories delve 
into internal conflict and emotional turmoil [Data: Reports (17, 268, 950, 
270)].
- **Mystical and Magical Conflicts:** Some narratives incorporate dark magic, 
blood rituals, and supernatural warfare, as seen in the Acheron Empire and 
Vlad’s transformation, blending fantasy with horror [Data: Reports (665, 614, 
575)].
…
[truncated]
The full response is quite large, and so we truncated here. Please see the full response
in the notebook, as well as some other examples.
In spite of the advantages of GraphRAG and its power in answering difficult sense‐
making questions (using QFS), the primary drawback of GraphRAG (as we’ve seen
above) is its substantial cost (and time) of upfront pre-processing.
While a standard RAG system simply needs to chunk text and generate vector
embeddings, a relatively fast and inexpensive process (although this becomes some‐
what more expensive with modern embedding models, which may have dimensions
as high as 4K), GraphRAG engages in a multistage, computationally intensive pre-
processing pipeline. It requires a powerful LLM to first read the entire corpus to
extract entities and relationships, then build a massive knowledge graph, run complex
community detection algorithms across that graph, and finally, it uses the LLM again
to generate hierarchical summaries for every identified theme.
Because of this overhead, GraphRAG is often the wrong tool for several common
production scenarios:
Rapidly changing corpora
For data that updates frequently, such as news feeds, support tickets, or active
code repositories, the constant need to recompute community summaries is
often financially and operationally impractical.
Latency-sensitive or personalized queries
The process of synthesizing multiple community summaries is inherently slower
than a standard vector lookup. It is not suitable for applications requiring subsec‐
ond responses or queries tailored to a specific user’s private data.
302 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Requirement for verbatim citations
GraphRAG excels at high-level abstraction. If your use case requires the LLM to
provide the exact (raw) sentence from a document for auditing or legal compli‐
ance, the summarized nature of the community reports may be too “lossy.”
Ultimately, if your queries are mostly simple fact retrieval (e.g., “What is the price of
X?”), the significant investment GraphRAG offers little ROI over a standard semantic
search.
The Graph Database Infrastructure
Integrating a knowledge graph into your RAG application is not just an architectural
decision; it’s a long-term operational and systems-level commitment. While the
potential for high-precision, explainable answers is high, so is the complexity of
building, scaling, and, most importantly, maintaining the graph database.
First, let’s look at how to pick a graph database, as this choice will dictate your entire
operational playbook. There are a few types of graph database systems:
Traditional server/cluster (e.g., Neo4j, TigerGraph)
You can run systems like Neo4J or TigerGraph as stateful, standalone services
on dedicated virtual machines (VMs) or in a Kubernetes cluster, and in many
ways, they act like traditional SQL databases. Here, your DevOps team is respon‐
sible for everything: installation, configuration, clustering, sharding, resource
management, and network security. Sizing is critical, as property graphs are often
memory-bound, and performance hinges on fitting the “hot” graph into RAM.
This is a good choice if you have strict on-premises/regulatory constraints or
require deep, low-level customization of the database engine that managed serv‐
ices don’t allow.
Managed cloud service (e.g., Neo4j Aura, Amazon Neptune)
Using the platform-as-a-service (Neo4j AuraDB, Amazon Neptune) approach,
you trade fine-grained control for operational simplicity. The cloud provider
handles patching, backups, and high availability, and the burden shifts from
server management to cost management and identity and access management
(IAM) integration.
Choose this if you need multitenant access, high availability, and automated
backups, but lack in-house graph database expertise or dedicated DevOps
resources to manage a cluster.
Embedded library (e.g., Kuzu, DuckDB)
In the more recent “serverless” model, like what is provided by Kuzu or DuckDB,
the database is a library that runs inside your application process. The “database”
is just a file on disk. Here, the traditional server-admin role vanishes, and the
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
303
challenge becomes data lifecycle and build management. How do you update the
static graph file in your running application containers? This requires a robust
CI/CD pipeline that can build a new data file, package it into a new container
image, and roll out the deployment.
This is a great choice if your KG is relatively small (under 10–20 GB), mostly
read-only, and can be refreshed via a CI/CD pipeline. The challenge here is
the data lifecycle—packaging new graph files into your container images for
deployment.
Once you’ve chosen a stack, the day-to-day operational work begins, and there are
several main challenges to consider:
ETL
This is, by far, the most underestimated cost. A stale graph is a useless graph.
Your source data may be constantly changing, and you need to build a reliable
ETL pipeline to ensure your KG is up-to-date. Crucially, in production, this
pipeline must solve for data integrity, and since building a graph from multiple
sources involves a sequence of operations, you risk ending up with a “broken”
graph if an import fails midway (e.g., your movie script chunks are imported, but
the IMDb metadata sync crashes).
While traditional SQL databases rely on transactions to ensure atomicity (an
“all-or-nothing” approach), wrapping a large graph “build” in a single transaction
is often infeasible; it can lock the database for hours and exhaust memory.
Instead, production RAG systems that use KGs can be designed for idempotency,
so that if your ingest code fails and you restart it, the result is the same as if it
had succeeded the first time. In Cypher, for example, this is achieved using MERGE
instead of CREATE—the database checks for an entity’s existence before adding it.
By combining idempotency with batching (committing every 1,000 nodes rather
than the whole graph), you move toward a model of eventual consistency that is
resilient enough for the messy reality of production enterprise data.
Schema rigidity and evolution
While graph databases are often marketed as “schema-less,” a RAG system
requires a predictable structure to generate valid Cypher or SPARQL queries.
Unlike SQL, most graph databases lack a simple ALTER TABLE command, so
when your domain evolves (e.g., when adding new relationship types or splitting
an entity), you must manage live migrations. This involves running background
scripts to refactor millions of nodes and edges without downtime. You may want
to consider schema versioning to ensure the LLM’s query-generation logic stays
synchronized with the current state of the data.
304 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Performance
A multi-hop graph traversal (e.g., for a query like “Find all users who reviewed
the same product as a user who lives in the same city as the CEO”) may have
variable latency. The time taken depends on the query’s depth and the graph’s
structure (e.g., hitting a “supernode”). Since most graphs are memory-intensive,
provisioning the right hardware (with enough RAM), and making sure it can
scale both vertically and horizontally, is key. This tends to be a relatively spe‐
cialized skill: the team will need to learn to profile Cypher/SPARQL queries,
identify bottlenecks, manage indices (both standard and vector), and potentially
restructure parts of the graph to avoid “supernode” hotspots.
Security, backup, and high availability
Like any stateful database, the graph DB also demands a robust disaster recovery
plan, with automated, tested backup and restore processes. However, security
in a graph-powered RAG system adds a layer of complexity beyond standard
encryption at rest. Because graphs often synthesize data from disparate sources,
your infrastructure must support RBAC, which may need to be implemented at
the node or relationship level—ensuring, for example, that an LLM can traverse
a Company node but is restricted from seeing the Salary property on a connected
Employee node.
It’s important to emphasize again that the maintenance overhead is a persistent and
often underestimated operational cost with graph databases. The core challenge is
ensuring data freshness and consistency: as source data changes, the graph must be
updated to reflect the new reality.
Knowledge graphs are powerful and can significantly increase the quality of respon‐
ses in your RAG application, but the decision to implement a KG hinges on a
clear-eyed cost–benefit analysis. Let’s review what is involved in making that decision.
Graph Update Patterns and Evolution
In production, your source data is rarely static. Keeping a KG synchronized with liv‐
ing data requires moving beyond the “full rebuild” approach and toward incremental
maintenance. This typically involves two primary patterns:
Ingestion strategies: CDC versus event-driven
To capture changes in your source systems (like a CRM or a SQL database), you
need a pipeline that triggers graph updates automatically:
Change data capture (CDC)
If your source data lives in a traditional database (e.g., Postgres), you can use
CDC tools (like Debezium) that listen to the database’s transaction log and
emit an event every time a row is created, updated, or deleted. These events
are then mapped to Cypher MERGE or DELETE commands in your KG.
Building Knowledge Graphs 
| 
305
Event-driven architectures
For unstructured data (like new PDF files or chat logs), an event-driven pat‐
tern is preferred. When a new document hits your storage (e.g., S3), it trig‐
gers a serverless function (like AWS Lambda) that runs the LLM-extraction
pipeline on only that specific file, appending new nodes and edges to the
existing graph.
Handling entity merges
A common edge case in long-running KGs is when two entities, previously
thought to be distinct, are discovered to be the same (e.g., “Twitter” and “X”). To
handle this, you must implement a “merge” logic, where one node’s relationships
are remapped to the “survivor” node (and the other node is deleted).
Another challenge is when facts “expire.” For example, if a person leaves a com‐
pany, the WORKS_AT relationship shouldn’t necessarily be deleted (to preserve
historical context), but it should be “tombstoned” with a status: "inactive"
label. Your RAG queries must then be updated to filter for :WORKS_AT {status:
"active"}.
Maintaining a living KG requires implementing automated ingestion pipelines (to
capture real-time data changes), while simultaneously applying internal lifecycle logic
to resolve identity conflicts and manage the relevance of aging facts.
The Accuracy/Cost Trade-off
When building your RAG application, you face a fundamental architectural choice:
stick with a “vanilla” RAG setup or invest in integrating a knowledge graph. This
decision is a classic engineering trade-off between the relatively low cost and simplic‐
ity of vanilla RAG against a potential, but not guaranteed, boost in accuracy. Before
committing to a graph-based approach, it’s important to understand your particular
ROI on KGs, and whether the accuracy gains that you actually see justify the increase
in cost and complexity.
Don’t underestimate vanilla RAG; it may already meet your requirements without any
added complexity, is relatively straightforward to implement, and is cost-effective to
operate. For many applications, like general-purpose question answering or summa‐
rizing large document sets, finding “directionally accurate” or “semantically relevant”
context is all the LLM needs to provide a high-quality response.
Implementing GraphRAG or any of the other approaches we covered for integrating
KG into your RAG application is not a minor addition; it’s a major commitment. The
cost isn’t just financial; it’s a heavy tax on development and operational resources. You
will need to invest heavily in graph data modeling, stand up and maintain new graph
database infrastructure, and build and maintain complex data pipelines to create and
keep the graph up-to-date with evolving source data.
306 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
The truth is that this ongoing maintenance burden is often underestimated and can
become a significant resource drain. It’s important to honestly assess if your system
needs this level of precision, and only do so if you see the potential ROI.
To make this decision actionable, here’s a quick checklist you can use. If you cannot
answer “Yes” to at least four of these questions, the operational “tax” of a KG may
outweigh the benefits for your current stage.
Factual failure
Do we have recurring multi-hop, time-bound, or highly constrained queries that
vanilla or hybrid RAG consistently fails on in our evaluations?
Grounding necessity
Does the use case require 100% deterministic grounding for specific entities (e.g.,
legal compliance or medical dosages) where “probabilistic” similarity is too risky?
Available assets
Is there an existing ontological asset (a licensed KG like DrugBank or LSEG
or a standard ontology like FIBO) that we can leverage to avoid building from
scratch?
Data connectivity
Does our data fit naturally with a graph structure? (That is, does the value lie in
the relationships among documents, such as corporate hierarchies or supply chain
dependencies, rather than the content of the documents themselves?)
Long-term ownership
Do we have a team with the capacity to own graph modeling, schema evolution,
and complex ETL pipelines for the long term?
Business ROI
Are the expected accuracy gains tied to a clear business outcome, such as reduc‐
ing risk, ensuring compliance, or unlocking new revenue-generating features?
Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced the idea of using knowledge graphs in RAG, with the
goal of achieving higher quality responses for the types of queries that a KG can help
answer best.
While vector search or hybrid search excel at understanding conceptual queries, they
might not work as well with questions that incorporate time-bound facts, multi-hop
logic, or overlapping constraints.
Knowledge graphs, on the other hand, excel at answering these types of questions.
By integrating KGs into RAG, whether through chunk enrichment or hybrid-graph
Conclusion 
| 
307
retrieval, you can enable your RAG application to answer more complex questions
with improved accuracy.
This advancement, however, is not free; it demands a significant investment in data
modeling, entity linking, ingestion pipelines, and infrastructure, forcing a crucial
trade-off between retrieval accuracy and operational complexity and cost.
Using KGs in RAG is an evolving field, and its future lies in automating the very
bottlenecks that make it so challenging. The painstaking, manual process of graph
construction is giving way to LLM-driven pipelines that extract entities and relations
with high efficiency, provided they are anchored by robust validation layers and
human oversight. The future of knowledge-enhanced RAG lies in automating these
bottlenecks while maintaining a “living” graph that can evolve its schema and logic
as business requirements change. A prominent example of this is Microsoft’s Graph‐
RAG, which uses large language models to construct a graph directly from source
documents. However, Microsoft’s specific implementation can introduce significant
cost and latency and may not be appropriate for every enterprise workload. More
broadly, knowledge-graph-enhanced RAG can be highly practical when the graph
architecture is designed around the application’s data model, query patterns, and
production constraints.
In practice, most teams start with standard RAG, and use evaluation techniques
(Chapter 6) to identify problematic queries with insufficient response accuracy, and
for those, they pilot knowledge-enhanced RAG or GraphRAG.
Table 9-2 summarizes the key approaches we’ve covered so far in the book, and their
individual advantages and limitations.
308 
| 
Chapter 9: Knowledge-Enhanced RAG
Table 9-2. Comparison of RAG architectures across retrieval methods, graph enhancement,
and agentic orchestration
Approach
Best for
Key limitation
Cost & complexity
Standard RAG
(vector search)
General Q&A, similarity-based
retrieval, and unstructured text
May struggle with multi-hop logic,
time-bound facts, or hard constraints.
May miss specific stock keeping units
(SKUs) or names that do not match in
semantic search.
Low. Simple to build and
maintain.
Keyword
hybrid (vector
+ BM25)
Balancing semantic meaning
with exact matches
Still struggles with multi-hop logic and
deep relationships.
Low-Medium. Requires
tuning weights between
vector and BM25.
KG-hybrid RAG
Precise, factual queries with
multiple constraints (e.g., “Find
CEOs who also own EVs”)
Requires building and maintaining an
up-to-date KG.
High. Significant data
engineering required.
Microsoft
GraphRAG
Broad, “sensemaking” queries
(e.g., “What are the main
themes in these 1,000 docs?”)
Very high upfront processing cost. Not
ideal for real-time data. Lacks verbatim
granularity.
Very High. Computationally
expensive ingestion.
Agentic RAG
Multi-hop logic and iterative
research tasks
High latency. Agents can get stuck in
loops or hallucinate tool paths.
Medium-High. Requires
robust orchestration
(LangGraph, etc.).
The knowledge graph research community continues to innovate with better, simpler,
and more cost-effective approaches to integrating KGs into RAG and agentic work‐
flows, and we expect this technology to provide more value and better ROI over time.
Conclusion 
| 
309
CHAPTER 10
The Future of RAG
RAG is arguably one of the most impactful approaches for applying LLMs to private
enterprise data. Over the last few years, it has graduated from an experimental
technique to the standard architectural pattern for enterprises that need a ChatGPT-
like experience grounded in their data, and is now moving quickly from POCs to
production deployments.
Throughout this book, you’ve mastered the pillars of RAG: LLMs, embeddings, vec‐
tor stores, and reranking. You’ve seen how a functional proof of concept can come to
life over a single weekend. But the leap from a local script to a resilient, production-
grade ecosystem is where the real engineering begins. It requires moving beyond “it
works” to solving for latency, accuracy at scale, and long-term maintainability.
Production RAG is not just about code; it is a distributed system that demands
rigorous governance and security. You must manage ingestion at scale, ensuring
data integrity across terabytes of multimodal content. More importantly, you must
implement a defense-in-depth security strategy, which means deploying entity-aware
redaction to scrub PII before it hits the model, enforcing strict role-based access
control so a junior analyst cannot retrieve sensitive HR documents, and maintaining
comprehensive audit trails for compliance standards like SOC 2, GDPR, and HIPAA.
Beyond security, you face the operational reality of total cost of ownership, and
you must manage vendor integration complexity, optimize for latency using decou‐
pled microservices, and assemble a multidisciplinary team capable of bridging ML,
DevOps, and security gaps.
We hope that by now you possess a deep understanding of how RAG works, what
each component does, and—perhaps most importantly—where the pitfalls lie. But in
generative AI, the ground is constantly shifting, and we are all bombarded with a
barrage of new techniques, papers, and vendor announcements every week. It is often
311
